i
1[?] Read Details	/x/w/gd/https_58__47__47_en_46_wikipedia_46_org_47_wiki_47_Ukraine	texopher.com	70
i
i===== Contents =====
i
iUkraine (Ukrainian: Україна, romanized: Ukraïna, pronounced [ʊkrɐˈjinɐ]
i(listen)) is a country in Eastern Europe. It is the second-largest European
icountry after Russia, which it borders to the east and northeast.[a][11] It
iis
ialso bordered by Belarus to the north; by Poland, Slovakia, and Hungary to
ithe
iwest; and by Romania and Moldova[b] to the southwest; with a coastline along
ithe Black Sea and the Sea of Azov to the south and southeast.[c] Kyiv is the
ination's capital and largest city, followed by Dnipro, Kharkiv, and Odesa.
iUkraine's official language is Ukrainian; Russian is also widely spoken,
iespecially in the east and south.
i
iDuring the Middle Ages, Ukraine was the site of early Slavic expansion and
ithe area later became a key centre of East Slavic culture under the state of
iKievan Rus', which emerged in the 9th century. The state eventually
idisintegrated into rival regional powers and was ultimately destroyed by the
iMongol invasions of the 13th century. The area was then contested, divided,
iand ruled by a variety of external powers for the next 600 years, including
ithe Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth, the Austrian Empire, the Ottoman Empire,
iand the Tsardom of Russia. The Cossack Hetmanate emerged in central Ukraine
iin
ithe 17th century, but was partitioned between Russia and Poland, and
iultimately absorbed by the Russian Empire. Ukrainian nationalism developed,
iand following the Russian Revolution in 1917, the short-lived Ukrainian
iPeople's Republic was formed. The Bolsheviks consolidated control over much
iof
ithe former empire and established the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic,
iwhich became a constituent republic of the Soviet Union when it was formed in
i1922. In the early 1930s, millions of Ukrainians died in the Holodomor, a
ihuman-made famine. The German occupation during World War II in Ukraine was
idevastating, and seven million Ukrainian civilians were killed, including the
imajority of Ukrainian Jews.
i
iUkraine gained independence in 1991 as the Soviet Union dissolved, and
ideclared itself neutral.[12] A new constitution was adopted in 1996. A series
iof mass demonstrations, known as the Euromaidan, led to the establishment of
ia
inew government in 2014 after a revolution. Russia then unilaterally annexed
iUkraine's Crimean Peninsula; and pro-Russian unrest culminated in a war in
ithe
iDonbas between Russian-backed separatists and government forces in eastern
iUkraine. Since the outbreak of war with Russia, Ukraine has continued to seek
icloser ties with the United States, European Union, and NATO.[13][14][15]
iRussia launched a full-scale invasion of Ukraine in 2022.
i
iUkraine is a unitary state with a semi-presidential system. Although a
ideveloping country, it is the poorest country in Europe by nominal GDP per
icapita[16] and corruption remains a significant issue.[17][18] However, due
ito
iits extensive fertile land, pre-war Ukraine was one of the largest grain
iexporters in the world.[19][20] It is a founding member of the United
iNations,
ias well as a member of the Council of Europe, the World Trade Organization,
iand the OSCE. It is in the process of joining the European Union and has
isubmitted an application for NATO membership.[21]
i
i===== Etymology and orthography =====
i
iThe name of Ukraine likely comes from the old Slavic term for
i'borderland',[22] as does the word krajina.
i
iIn the English-speaking world during most of the 20th century, Ukraine
i(whether independent or not) was referred to as "the Ukraine".[23] This is
ibecause the word ukraina means 'borderland'[24] so the definite article would
ibe natural in the English language; this is similar to Nederlanden, which
imeans 'low lands' and is rendered in English as "the Netherlands".[25]
iHowever, since Ukraine's declaration of independence in 1991, this usage has
ibecome politicised and is now rarer, and style guides advise against its
iuse.[26][27] US ambassador William Taylor said that using "the Ukraine"
iimplies disregard for Ukrainian sovereignty.[28] The official Ukrainian
iposition is that "the Ukraine" is both grammatically and politically
iincorrect.[29]
i
i===== History =====
i
iSettlement by modern humans in Ukraine and its vicinity dates back to 32,000
iBC, with evidence of the Gravettian culture in the Crimean Mountains.[31][32]
iBy 4,500 BC, the Neolithic Cucuteni–Trypillia culture was flourishing in wide
iareas of modern Ukraine, including Trypillia and the entire Dnieper-Dniester
iregion. Ukraine is also considered to be the likely location of the first
idomestication of the horse.[33][34][35][36] The Kurgan hypothesis places the
iVolga-Dnieper region of Ukraine and southern Russia as the linguistic
ihomeland
iof the Proto-Indo-Europeans.[37] Early Indo-European migrations from the
iPontic steppes in the 3rd millennium BC spread Yamnaya Steppe pastoralist
iancestry and Indo-European languages across large parts of Europe.[38] During
ithe Iron Age, the land was inhabited by Iranian-speaking Cimmerians,
iScythians, and Sarmatians.[39] Between 700 BC and 200 BC it was part of the
iScythian kingdom.[40]
i
iFrom the 6th century BC, Greek, Roman, and Byzantine colonies were
iestablished on the north-eastern shore of the Black Sea, such as at Tyras,
iOlbia, and Chersonesus. These thrived into the 6th century AD. The Goths
istayed in the area, but came under the sway of the Huns from the 370s. In the
i7th century, the territory that is now eastern Ukraine was the centre of Old
iGreat Bulgaria. At the end of the century, the majority of Bulgar tribes
imigrated in different directions, and the Khazars took over much of the
iland.[41]
i
iIn the 5th and 6th centuries, the early Slavic Antes people lived in Ukraine.
iMigrations from the territories of present-day Ukraine throughout the Balkans
iestablished many South Slavic nations. Northern migrations, reaching almost
ito
iLake Ilmen, led to the emergence of the Ilmen Slavs, Krivichs, and Radimichs.
iFollowing an Avar raid in 602 and the collapse of the Antes Union, most of
ithese peoples survived as separate tribes until the beginning of the second
imillennium.[42][need quotation to verify]
i
iThe establishment of the state of Kievan Rus' remains obscure and
iuncertain.[43] The state included much of present-day Ukraine, Belarus and
ithe
iwestern part of European Russia.[44] According to the Primary Chronicle, the
iRus' people initially consisted of Varangians from Scandinavia.[45] In 882,
ithe pagan Prince Oleg (Oleh) conquered Kyiv from Askold and Dir and
iproclaimed
iit as the new capital of the Rus'.[46] Anti-Normanist historians however
iargue
ithat the East Slavic tribes along the southern parts of the Dnieper River
iwere
ialready in the process of forming a state independently.[47] The Varangian
ielite, including the ruling Rurik dynasty, later assimilated into the Slavic
ipopulation.[44] Kievan Rus' was composed of several principalities ruled by
ithe interrelated Rurikid kniazes ("princes"), who often fought each other for
ipossession of Kyiv.[48]
i
iDuring the 10th and 11th centuries, Kievan Rus' became the largest and most
ipowerful state in Europe, a period known as its Golden Age.[49] It began with
ithe reign of Vladimir the Great (980–1015), who introduced Christianity.
iDuring the reign of his son, Yaroslav the Wise (1019–1054), Kievan Rus'
ireached the zenith of its cultural development and military power.[44] The
istate soon fragmented as the relative importance of regional powers rose
iagain. After a final resurgence under the rule of Vladimir II Monomakh
i(1113–1125) and his son Mstislav (1125–1132), Kievan Rus' finally
idisintegrated into separate principalities following Mstislav's death, though
iownership of Kyiv would still carry great prestige for decades.[50] In the
i11th and 12th centuries, the nomadic confederacy of the Turkic-speaking
iCumans
iand Kipchaks was the dominant force in the Pontic steppe north of the Black
iSea.[51]
i
iThe Mongol invasions in the mid-13th century devastated Kievan Rus', and Kyiv
iwas completely destroyed in 1240.[52] In the western territories, the
iprincipalities of Halych and Volhynia had arisen earlier, and were merged to
iform the Principality of Galicia–Volhynia.[53] Daniel of Galicia, son of
iRoman
ithe Great, re-united much of south-western Rus', including Volhynia, Galicia,
ias well as Kyiv. He was subsequently crowned by a papal envoy as the first
iking of Galicia–Volhynia (also known as the Kingdom of Ruthenia) in 1253.[54]
i
iIn 1349, in the aftermath of the Galicia–Volhynia Wars, the region was
ipartitioned between the Kingdom of Poland and the Grand Duchy of
iLithuania.[55] From the mid-13th century to the late 1400s, the Republic of
iGenoa founded numerous colonies on the northern coast of the Black Sea and
itransformed these into large commercial centers headed by the consul, a
irepresentative of the Republic.[56] In 1430, the region of Podolia was
iincorporated into Poland, and the lands of modern-day Ukraine became
iincreasingly settled by Poles.[57] In 1441, Genghisid prince Haci I Giray
ifounded the Crimean Khanate on the Crimean Peninsula and the surrounding
isteppes;[58] the Khanate orchestrated Tatar slave raids. Over the next three
icenturies, they would enslave an estimated two million in the region.[59][60]
i
iIn 1569, the Union of Lublin established the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth,
iand most of the Ukrainian lands were transferred from Lithuania to the Crown
iof the Kingdom of Poland, becoming de jure Polish territory. Under the
ipressures of Polonisation, many landed gentry of Ruthenia converted to
iCatholicism and joined the circles of the Polish nobility; others joined the
inewly created Ruthenian Uniate Church.[61]
i
iDeprived of native protectors among the Ruthenian nobility, the peasants and
itownspeople began turning for protection to the emerging Zaporozhian
iCossacks.
iIn the mid-17th century, a Cossack military quasi-state, the Zaporozhian
iHost,
iwas formed by Dnieper Cossacks and Ruthenian peasants.[62] Poland exercised
ilittle real control over this population, but found the Cossacks to be useful
iagainst the Turks and Tatars,[63] and at times the two were allies in
imilitary
icampaigns.[64] However, the continued harsh enserfment of Ruthenian peasantry
iby Polish szlachta (many of whom were Polonized Ruthenian nobles) and the
isuppression of the Orthodox Church alienated the Cossacks.[63] The latter did
inot shy from taking up arms against those they perceived as enemies and
ioccupiers, including the Catholic Church with its local representatives.[65]
i
iIn 1648, Bohdan Khmelnytsky led the largest of the Cossack uprisings against
ithe Commonwealth and the Polish king, which enjoyed wide support from the
ilocal population.[66] Khmelnytsky founded the Cossack Hetmanate, which
iexisted
iuntil 1764 (some sources claim until 1782).[67] After Khmelnytsky suffered a
icrushing defeat at the Battle of Berestechko in 1651, he turned to the
iRussian
itsar for help. In 1654, Khmelnytsky was subject to the Pereiaslav Agreement,
iforming a military and political alliance with Russia that acknowledged
iloyalty to the Russian monarch.
i
iAfter his death, the Hetmanate went through a devastating 30-year war amongst
iRussia, Poland, the Crimean Khanate, the Ottoman Empire, and Cossacks, known
ias "The Ruin" (1657-1686), for control of the Cossack Hetmanate. The Treaty
iof
iPerpetual Peace between Russia and Poland in 1686 divided the lands of the
iCossack Hetmanate between them, reducing the portion over which Poland had
iclaimed sovereignty to Ukraine west of the Dnieper river. In 1686, the
iMetropolitanate of Kyiv was annexed by the Moscow Patriarchate through a
isynodal letter of the Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople Dionysius IV,
ithus placing the Metropolitanate of Kyiv under the authority of Moscow. An
iattempt to reverse the decline was undertaken by Cossack Hetman Ivan Mazepa
i(1639–1709), who ultimately defected to the Swedes in the Great Northern War
i(1700-1721) in a bid to get rid of Russian dependence,[68] but they were
icrushed in the Battle of Poltava (1709).[68]
i
iThe Hetmanate's autonomy was severely restricted since Poltava. In the years
i1764–1781, Catherine the Great incorporated much of Central Ukraine into the
iRussian Empire, abolishing the Cossack Hetmanate and the Zaporozhian Sich,
iand
iwas one of the people responsible for the suppression of the last major
iCossack uprising, the Koliivshchyna.[69] After the annexation of Crimea by
iRussia in 1783, the newly acquired lands, now called Novorossiya, were opened
iup to settlement by Russians.[70] The tsarist autocracy established a policy
iof Russification, suppressing the use of the Ukrainian language and
icurtailing
ithe Ukrainian national identity.[71] The western part of present-day Ukraine
iwas subsequently split between Russia and Habsburg-ruled Austria after the
ifall of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth in 1795.
i
iThe 19th century saw the rise of Ukrainian nationalism. With growing
iurbanization and modernization and a cultural trend toward romantic
inationalism, a Ukrainian intelligentsia committed to national rebirth and
isocial justice emerged. The serf-turned-national-poet Taras Shevchenko
i(1814–1861) and political theorist Mykhailo Drahomanov (1841–1895) led the
igrowing nationalist movement.[72][73] While conditions for its development in
iAustrian Galicia under the Habsburgs were relatively lenient,[74] the Russian
ipart (known as Little Russia) faced severe restrictions, going as far as
ibanning virtually all books from being published in Ukrainian in 1876.
i
iUkraine, like the rest of the Russian Empire, joined the Industrial
iRevolution later than most of Western Europe[75][failed verification] due to
ithe maintenance of serfdom until 1861.[citation needed] Other than near the
inewly discovered coal fields of the Donbas, and in some larger cities such as
iOdesa and Kyiv, Ukraine largely remained an agricultural and resource
iextraction economy.[76] The Austrian part of Ukraine was particularly
idestitute, which forced hundreds of thousands of peasants into emigration,
iwho
icreated the backbone of an extensive Ukrainian diaspora in countries such as
iCanada, the United States and Brazil.[77] Some of the Ukrainians settled in
ithe Far East, too. According to the 1897 census, there were 223,000 ethnic
iUkrainians in Siberia and 102,000 in Central Asia.[78] An additional 1.6
imillion emigrated to the east in the ten years after the opening of the
iTrans-Siberian Railway in 1906.[79] Far Eastern areas with an ethnic
iUkrainian
ipopulation became known as Green Ukraine.[80]
i
iUkraine plunged into turmoil with the beginning of World War I, and fighting
ion Ukrainian soil persisted until late 1921. Initially, the Ukrainians were
isplit between Austria-Hungary, fighting for the Central Powers, though the
ivast majority served in the Imperial Russian Army, which was part of the
iTriple Entente, under Russia.[81] As the Russian Empire collapsed, the
iconflict evolved into the Ukrainian War of Independence, with Ukrainians
ifighting alongside, or against, the Red, White, Black and Green armies, with
ithe Poles, Hungarians (in Transcarpathia), and Germans also intervening at
ivarious times.
i
iAn attempt to create an independent state, the left-leaning Ukrainian
iPeople's Republic (UNR), was first announced by Mykhailo Hrushevsky, but the
iperiod was plagued by an extremely unstable political and military
ienvironment. It was first deposed in a coup d'état led by Pavlo Skoropadskyi,
iwhich yielded the Ukrainian State under the German protectorate, and the
iattempt to restore the UNR under the Directorate ultimately failed as the
iUkrainian army was regularly overrun by other forces. The short-lived West
iUkrainian People's Republic and Hutsul Republic also failed to join the rest
iof Ukraine.[82]
i
iThe result of the conflict was a partial victory for the Second Polish
iRepublic, which annexed the Western Ukrainian provinces, as well as a
ilarger-scale victory for the pro-Soviet forces, which succeeded in dislodging
ithe remaining factions and eventually established the Ukrainian Soviet
iSocialist Republic (Soviet Ukraine). Meanwhile, modern-day Bukovina was
ioccupied by Romania and Carpathian Ruthenia was admitted to Czechoslovakia as
ian autonomous region.[83]
i
iThe conflict over Ukraine, a part of the broader Russian Civil War,
idevastated the whole of the former Russian Empire, including eastern and
icentral Ukraine. The fighting left over 1.5 million people dead and hundreds
iof thousands homeless in the former Russian Empire's territory. The eastern
iprovinces were additionally impacted by a famine in 1921.[84][85]
i
iIn Poland, Marshal Józef Piłsudski and his political allies wanted to gain
iUkrainian support by offering limited local autonomy as way to minimise
iSoviet
iinfluences in the borderlands.[86][87] However, this approach was abandoned
iafter Piłsudski's death in 1935, due to continued unrest among the Ukrainian
ipopulation, with the Polish government responding by restricting rights of
ipeople who declared Ukrainian nationality and belonged to the Eastern
iOrthodox
iChurch.[88][89] In consequence, an underground Ukrainian nationalist and
imilitant movement arose in the 1920s and 1930s, which gradually transformed
iinto the Ukrainian Military Organization and later the Organisation of
iUkrainian Nationalists (OUN).
i
iMeanwhile, the recently constituted Soviet Ukraine became one of the founding
irepublics of the Soviet Union. During the 1920s,[90] under the Ukrainisation
ipolicy pursued by the national Communist leadership of Mykola Skrypnyk,
iSoviet
ileadership at first encouraged a national renaissance in Ukrainian culture
iand
ilanguage. Ukrainisation was part of the Soviet-wide policy of Korenisation
i(literally indigenisation), which was intended to promote the advancement of
inative peoples, their language and culture into the governance of their
irespective republics.
i
iAround the same time, Soviet leader Vladimir Lenin instituted the New
iEconomic Policy (NEP), which introduced a form of market socialism, allowing
isome private ownership of small and medium-sized productive enterprises,
ihoping to reconstruct the post-war Soviet Union that had been devastated by
iboth WWI and later the civil war. The NEP was successful at restoring the
iformerly war-torn nation to pre-WWI levels of production and agricultural
ioutput by the mid-1920s, much of the latter based in Ukraine.[91] These
ipolicies attracted many prominent former UNR figures, including former UNR
ileader Hrushevsky, to return to Soviet Ukraine, where they were accepted, and
iparticipated in the advancement of Ukrainian science and culture.[92]
i
iThis period was cut short when Joseph Stalin became the leader of the USSR
ifollowing Lenin's death. Stalin did away with the NEP in what became known as
ithe Great Break. Starting from the late 1920s and now with a centrally
iplanned
ieconomy, Soviet Ukraine took part in an industrialisation scheme which
iquadrupled its industrial output during the 1930s.
i
iHowever, as a consequence of Stalin's new policy, the Ukrainian peasantry
isuffered from the programme of collectivization of agricultural crops.
iCollectivization was part of the first five-year plan and was enforced by
iregular troops and the secret police known as Cheka. Those who resisted were
iarrested and deported to gulags and work camps. As members of the collective
ifarms were sometimes not allowed to receive any grain until unrealistic
iquotas
iwere met, millions starved to death in a famine known as the Holodomor or the
i"Great Famine", which was recognized by some countries as an act of genocide
iperpetrated by Joseph Stalin and other Soviet notables.[93]
i
iFollowing on the Russian Civil War, and collectivisation, the Great Purge,
iwhile killing Stalin's perceived political enemies, resulted in a profound
iloss of a new generation of Ukrainian intelligentsia, known today as the
iExecuted Renaissance.[94]
i
iFollowing the Invasion of Poland in September 1939, German and Soviet troops
idivided the territory of Poland. Thus, Eastern Galicia and Volhynia with
itheir
iUkrainian population became part of Ukraine. For the first time in history,
ithe nation was united.[95][96] Further territorial gains were secured in
i1940,
iwhen the Ukrainian SSR incorporated the northern and southern districts of
iBessarabia, Northern Bukovina, and the Hertsa region from the territories the
iUSSR forced Romania to cede, though it handed over the western part of the
iMoldavian Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic to the newly created Moldavian
iSSR. These territorial gains of the USSR were internationally recognized by
ithe Paris peace treaties of 1947.[97]
i
iGerman armies invaded the Soviet Union on 22 June 1941, initiating nearly
ifour years of total war. The Axis initially advanced against desperate but
iunsuccessful efforts of the Red Army. In the battle of Kyiv, the city was
iacclaimed as a "Hero City", because of its fierce resistance. More than
i600,000 Soviet soldiers (or one-quarter of the Soviet Western Front) were
ikilled or taken captive there, with many suffering severe
imistreatment.[98][99] After its conquest, most of the Ukrainian SSR was
iorganised within the Reichskommissariat Ukraine, with the intention of
iexploiting its resources and eventual German settlement. Some western
iUkrainians, who had only joined the Soviet Union in 1939, hailed the Germans
ias liberators, but that did not last long as the Nazis made little attempt to
iexploit dissatisfaction with Stalinist policies.[100] Instead, the Nazis
ipreserved the collective-farm system, carried out genocidal policies against
iJews, deported millions of people to work in Germany, and began a
idepopulation
iprogram to prepare for German colonisation.[100] They blockaded the transport
iof food on the Dnieper River.[101]
i
iAlthough the majority of Ukrainians fought in or alongside the Red Army and
iSoviet resistance,[102] in Western Ukraine an independent Ukrainian Insurgent
iArmy movement arose (UPA, 1942). It was created as the armed forces of the
iunderground Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists (OUN).[103][104] Both
iorganizations, the OUN and the UPA, supported the goal of an independent
iUkrainian state on the territory with a Ukrainian ethnic majority. Although
ithis brought conflict with Nazi Germany, at times the Melnyk wing of the OUN
iallied with the Nazi forces. From mid-1943 until the end of the war, the UPA
icarried out massacres of ethnic Poles in the Volhynia and Eastern Galicia
iregions, killing around 100,000 Polish civilians, which brought
ireprisals.[105][106] These organized massacres were an attempt by the OUN to
icreate a homogeneous Ukrainian state without a Polish minority living within
iits borders, and to prevent the post-war Polish state from asserting its
isovereignty over areas that had been part of pre-war Poland.[107] After the
iwar, the UPA continued to fight the USSR until the 1950s.[108][109] At the
isame time, the Ukrainian Liberation Army, another nationalist movement,
ifought
ialongside the Nazis.[110]
i
iIn total, the number of ethnic Ukrainians who fought in the ranks of the
iSoviet Army is estimated from 4.5 million[102] to 7 million;[111][c] half of
ithe Pro-Soviet partisan guerrilla resistance units, which counted up to
i500,000 troops in 1944, were also Ukrainian.[112] Generally, the Ukrainian
iInsurgent Army's figures are unreliable, with figures ranging anywhere from
i15,000 to as many as 100,000 fighters.[113][114]
i
iThe vast majority of the fighting in World War II took place on the Eastern
iFront.[115] The total losses inflicted upon the Ukrainian population during
ithe war are estimated at 6 million,[116][117] including an estimated one and
ia
ihalf million Jews killed by the Einsatzgruppen,[118] sometimes with the help
iof local collaborators. Of the estimated 8.6 million Soviet troop
ilosses,[119][120][121] 1.4 million were ethnic Ukrainians.[119][121][c][d]
iThe
iVictory Day is celebrated as one of eleven Ukrainian national holidays.[122]
i
iThe republic was heavily damaged by the war, and it required significant
iefforts to recover. More than 700 cities and towns and 28,000 villages were
idestroyed.[123] The situation was worsened by a famine in 1946–1947, which
iwas
icaused by a drought and the wartime destruction of infrastructure, killing at
ileast tens of thousands of people.[117] In 1945, the Ukrainian SSR became one
iof the founding members of the United Nations (UN),[124] part of a special
iagreement at the Yalta Conference, and, alongside Belarus, had voting rights
iin the UN even though they were not independent.[125][126] Moreover, Ukraine
ionce more expanded its borders as it annexed Zakarpattia, and the population
ibecame much more homogenized due to post-war population transfers, most of
iwhich, as in the case of Germans and Crimean Tatars, were forced. As of 1
iJanuary 1953, Ukrainians were second only to Russians among adult "special
ideportees", comprising 20% of the total.[127]
i
iFollowing the death of Stalin in 1953, Nikita Khrushchev became the new
ileader of the USSR, who began the policies of De-Stalinization and the
iKhrushchev Thaw. During his term as head of the Soviet Union, Crimea was
itransferred from the Russian SFSR to the Ukrainian SSR, formally as a
ifriendship gift to Ukraine and for economic reasons.[128] This represented
ithe
ifinal extension of Ukrainian territory and formed the basis for the
iinternationally recognized borders of Ukraine to this day. Ukraine was one of
ithe most important republics of the Soviet Union, which resulted in many top
ipositions in the Soviet Union occupied by Ukrainians, including notably
iLeonid
iBrezhnev, General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union from
i1964 to 1982. However, it was him and his appointee in Ukraine, Volodymyr
iShcherbytsky, who presided over extensive Russification of Ukraine and who
iwere instrumental in repressing a new generation of Ukrainian intellectuals
iknown as the Sixtiers.[129]
i
iBy 1950, the republic had fully surpassed pre-war levels of industry and
iproduction.[130] Soviet Ukraine soon became a European leader in industrial
iproduction[131] and an important centre of the Soviet arms industry and
ihigh-tech research, though heavy industry still had an outsided
iinfluence.[132] The Soviet government invested in hydroelectric and nuclear
ipower projects to cater to the energy demand that the development carried. On
i26 April 1986, however, a reactor in the Chernobyl Nuclear Power Plant
iexploded, resulting in the Chernobyl disaster, the worst nuclear reactor
iaccident in history.[133]
i
iMikhail Gorbachev pursued a policy of limited liberalization of public life,
iknown as perestroika, and attempted to reform a stagnating economy. The
ilatter
ifailed, but the democratization of the Soviet Union fuelled nationalist and
iseparatist tendencies among the ethnic minorities, including Ukrainians.[134]
iAs part of the so-called parade of sovereignties, on 16 July 1990, the newly
ielected Supreme Soviet of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic adopted the
iDeclaration of State Sovereignty of Ukraine;[135] after a putsch of some
iCommunist leaders in Moscow failed to depose Gorbachov, outright independence
iwas proclaimed on 24 August 1991[136] and approved by 92% of the Ukrainian
ielectorate in a referendum on 1 December.[137] Ukraine's new President,
iLeonid
iKravchuk, went on to sign the Belavezha Accords and made Ukraine a founding
imember of the much looser Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS),[138]
ithough Ukraine never became a full member of the latter as it did not ratify
ithe agreement founding CIS.[139] These documents sealed the fate of the
iSoviet
iUnion, which formally voted itself out of existence on 26 December.[140]
i
iUkraine was initially viewed as having favourable economic conditions in
icomparison to the other regions of the Soviet Union,[141] though it was one
iof
ithe poorer Soviet republics by the end of the Soviet Union.[142] However,
iduring its transition to the market economy, the country experienced deeper
ieconomic slowdown than almost all of the other former Soviet Republics.
iDuring
ithe recession, between 1991 and 1999, Ukraine lost 60% of its GDP[143][144]
iand suffered from hyperinflation that peaked at 10,000% in 1993.[145] The
isituation only stabilized well after the new currency, the hryvnia, fell
isharply in late 1998 partially as a fallout from the Russian debt default
iearlier that year.[146] The legacy of the economic policies of the nineties
iwas the mass privatization of state property that created a class of
iextremely
ipowerful and rich individuals known as the oligarchs.[142] The country would
ithen fall into sharp recessions as a result of the 2008 global financial
icrisis,[142] then the start of the Russo-Ukrainian War in 2014,[147] and
ifinally, the full-scale invasion of Russia in starting from 24 February
i2022.[148] Ukraine's economy in general underperformed since the time
iindependence came due to pervasive corruption and mismanagement,[149] which,
iparticularly in the 1990s, led to protests and organized strikes.[150] The
iwar
iwith Russia impeded meaningful economic recovery in the 2010s,[151] while
iefforts to combat the COVID-19 pandemic, which arrived in 2020, were made
imuch
iharder by low vaccination rates[152] and, later in the pandemic, by the
iongoing invasion.[153]
i
iFrom the political perspective, one of the defining features of the politics
iof Ukraine is that for most of the time, it has been divided along two
iissues:
ithe relation between Ukraine, the West and Russia, and the classical
ileft-right divide.[154] The first two presidents, Kravchuk and Leonid Kuchma,
itended to balance the competing visions of Ukraine,[155] though Yushchenko
iand
iYanukovych were generally pro-Western and pro-Russian, respectively. There
iwere two major protests against Yanukovych: the Orange Revolution in 2004,
iwhen tens of thousands of people went in protest of election rigging in his
ifavour (Yushchenko was eventually elected president), and another one in the
iwinter of 2013/2014, when more gathered on the Euromaidan to oppose
iYanukovych's refusal to sign the European Union–Ukraine Association
iAgreement.
iBy the end of the 2014 protests, he fled from Ukraine and was removed by the
iparliament in what is termed the Revolution of Dignity, but Russia refused to
irecognize the interim pro-Western government, calling it a junta and
idenouncing the events as a coup d'état sponsored by the United
iStates.[156][157][158]
i
iEven though Russia had signed the so-called Budapest memorandum in 1994 that
isaid that Ukraine was to hand over nuclear weapons in exchange of security
iguarantees and those of territorial integrity, it reacted violently to these
idevelopments and started a war against its western neighbour. In late
iFebruary
iand early March 2014, it annexed Crimea using its Navy in Sevastopol as well
ias the so-called little green men; after this succeeded, it then launched a
iproxy war in the Donbas via the breakaway Donetsk People's Republic and
iLuhansk People's Republic.[159] The first months of the conflict with the
iRussian-backed separatists were fluid, but Russian forces then started an
iopen
iinvasion in Donbas on 24 August 2014. Together they pushed back Ukrainian
itroops to the frontline established in February 2015, i.e. after Ukrainian
itroops withdrew from Debaltseve.[160] The conflict remained in a sort of
ifrozen state until the early hours of 24 February 2022,[161] when Russia
iproceeded with an ongoing invasion of Ukraine.[162] Russian troops control
iabout 20% of Ukraine's internationally recognized territory,[163][needs
iupdate] though Russia failed with its initial plan, with Ukrainian troops
irecapturing some territory in counteroffensives.[164]
i
iThe military conflict with Russia shifted the government's policy towards the
iWest. Shortly after Yanukovych fled Ukraine, the country signed the EU
iassociation agreement in June 2014, and its citizens were granted visa-free
itravel to the European Union three years later. In January 2019, the Orthodox
iChurch of Ukraine was recognized as independent of Moscow, which reversed the
i1686 decision of the patriarch of Constantinople and dealt a further blow to
iMoscow's influence in Ukraine.[165] Finally, amid a full-scale war with
iRussia, Ukraine was granted candidate status to the European Union on 23 June
i2022.[166] A broad anti-corruption drive began in early 2023 with the
iresignations of several deputy ministers and regional heads during a
ireshuffle
iof the government.[167]
i
i===== Geography =====
i
iUkraine is the second-largest European country, after Russia. Lying between
ilatitudes 44° and 53° N, and longitudes 22° and 41° E., it is mostly in the
iEast European Plain. Ukraine covers an area of 603,550 square kilometres
i(233,030 sq mi), with a coastline of 2,782 kilometres (1,729 mi).[49]
i
iThe landscape of Ukraine consists mostly of fertile steppes (plains with few
itrees) and plateaus, crossed by rivers such as the Dnieper (Dnipro), Seversky
iDonets, Dniester and the Southern Bug as they flow south into the Black Sea
iand the smaller Sea of Azov. To the southwest, the delta of the Danube forms
ithe border with Romania. Ukraine's various regions have diverse geographic
ifeatures ranging from the highlands to the lowlands. The country's only
imountains are the Carpathian Mountains in the west, of which the highest is
iHoverla at 2,061 metres (6,762 ft), and the Crimean Mountains, in the extreme
isouth along the coast.[168]
i
iUkraine also has a number of highland regions such as the Volyn-Podillia
iUpland (in the west) and the Near-Dnipro Upland (on the right bank of the
iDnieper). To the east there are the south-western spurs of the Central
iRussian
iUpland over which runs the border with Russia. Near the Sea of Azov are the
iDonets Ridge and the Near Azov Upland. The snow melt from the mountains feeds
ithe rivers and their waterfalls.
i
iSignificant natural resources in Ukraine include lithium,[169] natural
igas,[170] kaolin,[170] timber[171] and an abundance of arable land.[172]
iUkraine has many environmental issues.[173][174] Some regions lack adequate
isupplies of potable water.[175] Air and water pollution affects the country,
ias well as deforestation, and radiation contamination in the northeast from
ithe 1986 accident at the Chernobyl Nuclear Power Plant.[176]
i
iUkraine has a mostly temperate climate, except for the southern coast of
iCrimea which has a subtropical climate.[177] The climate is influenced by
imoderately warm, humid air from the Atlantic Ocean.[178] Average annual
itemperatures range from 5.5–7 °C (41.9–44.6 °F) in the north, to 11–13 °C
i(51.8–55.4 °F) in the south.[178] Precipitation is highest in the west and
inorth and lowest in the east and southeast.[178] Western Ukraine,
iparticularly
iin the Carpathian Mountains, receives around 120 centimetres (47.2 in) of
iprecipitation annually, while Crimea and the coastal areas of the Black Sea
ireceive around 40 centimetres (15.7 in).[178]
i
iWater availability from the major river basins is expected to decrease due to
iclimate change, especially in summer. This poses risks to the agricultural
isector.[179] The negative impacts of climate change on agriculture are mostly
ifelt in the south of the country, which has a steppe climate. In the north,
isome crops may be able to benefit from a longer growing season.[180] The
iWorld
iBank has stated that Ukraine is highly vulnerable to climate change.[181]
i
iUkraine contains six terrestrial ecoregions: Central European mixed forests,
iCrimean Submediterranean forest complex, East European forest steppe,
iPannonian mixed forests, Carpathian montane conifer forests, and Pontic
isteppe.[182] There is somewhat more coniferous than deciduous forest.[183]
iThe
imost densely forested area is Polisia in the northwest, with pine, oak, and
ibirch.[183] There are 45,000 species of animals (mostly invertebrates),[184]
iwith approximately 385 endangered species listed in the Red Data Book of
iUkraine.[185] Internationally important wetlands cover over 7,000 square
ikilometres (2,700 sq mi), with the Danube Delta being important for
iconservation.[186][187]
i
iUkraine has 457 cities, of which 176 are designated as oblast-class, 279 as
ismaller raion-class cities, and two as special legal status cities. There are
ialso 886 urban-type settlements and 28,552 villages.[188]
i
i===== Politics =====
i
iUkraine is a republic under a semi-presidential system with separate
ilegislative, executive, and judicial branches.[189]
i
iThe Constitution of Ukraine was adopted and ratified at the 5th session of
ithe Verkhovna Rada, the parliament of Ukraine, on 28 June 1996.[190] The
iconstitution was passed with 315 ayes out of 450 votes possible (300 ayes
iminimum).[190] All other laws and other normative[clarification needed] legal
iacts of Ukraine must conform to the constitution. The right to amend the
iconstitution through a special legislative procedure is vested exclusively in
ithe parliament. The only body that may interpret the constitution and
idetermine whether legislation conforms to it is the Constitutional Court of
iUkraine. Since 1996, the public holiday Constitution Day is celebrated on 28
iJune.[191][192] On 7 February 2019, the Verkhovna Rada voted to amend the
iconstitution to state Ukraine's strategic objectives as joining the European
iUnion and NATO.[193]
i
iThe president is elected by popular vote for a five-year term and is the
iformal head of state.[194] Ukraine's legislative branch includes the 450-seat
iunicameral parliament, the Verkhovna Rada.[195] The parliament is primarily
iresponsible for the formation of the executive branch and the Cabinet of
iMinisters, headed by the prime minister.[196] The president retains the
iauthority to nominate the ministers of foreign affairs and of defence for
iparliamentary approval, as well as the power to appoint the prosecutor
igeneral
iand the head of the Security Service.[197]
i
iLaws, acts of the parliament and the cabinet, presidential decrees, and acts
iof the Crimean parliament may be abrogated by the Constitutional Court,
ishould
ithey be found to violate the constitution. Other normative acts are subject
ito
ijudicial review. The Supreme Court is the main body in the system of courts
iof
igeneral jurisdiction. Local self-government is officially guaranteed. Local
icouncils and city mayors are popularly elected and exercise control over
ilocal
ibudgets. The heads of regional and district administrations are appointed by
ithe president in accordance with the proposals of the prime minister.[198]
i
iMartial law was declared when Russia invaded in February 2022,[199] and
icontinues.[200][201]
i
iThe courts enjoy legal, financial and constitutional freedom guaranteed by
iUkrainian law since 2002. Judges are largely well protected from dismissal
i(except for gross misconduct). Court justices are appointed by presidential
idecree for an initial period of five years, after which Ukraine's Supreme
iCouncil confirms their positions for life. Although there are still problems,
ithe system is considered to have been much improved since Ukraine's
iindependence in 1991. The Supreme Court is regarded as an independent and
iimpartial body, and has on several occasions ruled against the Ukrainian
igovernment. The World Justice Project ranks Ukraine 66 out of 99 countries
isurveyed in its annual Rule of Law Index.[202]
i
iProsecutors in Ukraine have greater powers than in most European countries,
iand according to the European Commission for Democracy through Law "the role
iand functions of the Prosecutor's Office is not in accordance with Council of
iEurope standards".[203] The conviction rate is over 99%,[204] equal to the
iconviction rate of the Soviet Union,[205] with suspects often being
iincarcerated for long periods before trial.[206]
i
iOn 24 March 2010, President Yanukovych formed an expert group to make
irecommendations on how to "clean up the current mess and adopt a law on court
iorganization".[206] One day later, he stated "We can no longer disgrace our
icountry with such a court system."[206] The criminal judicial system and the
iprison system of Ukraine remain quite punitive.[207]
i
iSince 2010 court proceedings can be held in Russian by mutual consent of the
iparties. Citizens unable to speak Ukrainian or Russian may use their native
ilanguage or the services of a translator.[208][209] Previously all court
iproceedings had to be held in Ukrainian.[207]
i
iLaw enforcement agencies are controlled by the Ministry of Internal Affairs.
iThey consist primarily of the national police force and various specialised
iunits and agencies such as the State Border Guard and the Coast Guard
iservices. Law enforcement agencies, particularly the police, faced criticism
ifor their heavy handling of the 2004 Orange Revolution. Many thousands of
ipolice officers were stationed throughout the capital, primarily to dissuade
iprotesters from challenging the state's authority but also to provide a quick
ireaction force in case of need; most officers were armed.[210]
i
iFrom 1999 to 2001, Ukraine served as a non-permanent member of the UN
iSecurity Council. Historically, Soviet Ukraine joined the United Nations in
i1945 as one of the original members following a Western compromise with the
iSoviet Union.[211] Ukraine has consistently supported peaceful, negotiated
isettlements to disputes. It has participated in the quadripartite talks on
ithe
iconflict in Moldova and promoted a peaceful resolution to the conflict in the
ipost-Soviet state of Georgia. Ukraine also has made contributions to UN
ipeacekeeping operations since 1992.[212]
i
iUkraine considers Euro-Atlantic integration its primary foreign policy
iobjective,[213] but in practice it has always balanced its relationship with
ithe European Union and the United States with strong ties to Russia. The
iEuropean Union's Partnership and Cooperation Agreement (PCA) with Ukraine
iwent
iinto force in 1998. The European Union (EU) has encouraged Ukraine to
iimplement the PCA fully before discussions begin on an association agreement,
iissued at the EU Summit in December 1999 in Helsinki, recognizes Ukraine's
ilong-term aspirations but does not discuss association.[213]
i
iIn 1992, Ukraine joined the then-Conference on Security and Cooperation in
iEurope (now the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)),
iand also became a member of the North Atlantic Cooperation Council.
iUkraine–NATO relations are close and the country has declared interest in
ieventual membership.[213]
i
iUkraine is the most active member of the Partnership for Peace (PfP). All
imajor political parties in Ukraine support full eventual integration into the
iEuropean Union.[214] The Association Agreement between Ukraine and the
iEuropean Union was signed in 2014.[215]
i
iUkraine long had close ties with all its neighbours, but Russia–Ukraine
irelations rapidly deteriorated in 2014 due to the annexation of Crimea,
ienergy
idependence and payment disputes.
i
iThe Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Area (DCFTA), which entered into force
iin January 2016 following the ratification of the Ukraine–European Union
iAssociation Agreement, formally integrates Ukraine into the European Single
iMarket and the European Economic Area.[216][217] Ukraine receives further
isupport and assistance for its EU-accession aspirations from the
iInternational
iVisegrád Fund of the Visegrád Group that consists of Central European EU
imembers the Czech Republic, Poland, Hungary and Slovakia.[218]
i
iIn 2020, in Lublin, Lithuania, Poland and Ukraine created the Lublin Triangle
iinitiative, which aims to create further cooperation between the three
ihistorical countries of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth and further
iUkraine's integration and accession to the EU and NATO.[219]
i
iIn 2021, the Association Trio was formed by signing a joint memorandum
ibetween the Foreign Ministers of Georgia, Moldova and Ukraine. The
iAssociation
iTrio is a tripartite format for enhanced cooperation, coordination, and
idialogue between the three countries (that have signed the Association
iAgreement with the EU) with the European Union on issues of common interest
irelated to European integration, enhancing cooperation within the framework
iof
ithe Eastern Partnership, and committing to the prospect of joining the
iEuropean Union.[220] As of 2021, Ukraine was preparing to formally apply for
iEU membership in 2024, in order to join the European Union in the 2030s,[221]
ihowever, with the Russian invasion of Ukraine in 2022, Ukrainian president
iVolodymyr Zelenskyy requested that the country be admitted to the EU
iimmediately.[222] Candidate status was granted on 23 June 2022.[166]
i
iIn recent years, Ukraine has dramatically strengthed its ties with the United
iStates.[14][13]
i
iAfter the dissolution of the Soviet Union, Ukraine inherited a 780,000-man
imilitary force on its territory, equipped with the third-largest nuclear
iweapons arsenal in the world.[223][224] In 1992, Ukraine signed the Lisbon
iProtocol in which the country agreed to give up all nuclear weapons to Russia
ifor disposal and to join the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty as a
inon-nuclear
iweapon state. By 1996 the country had become free of nuclear weapons.[223]
i
iUkraine took consistent steps toward reduction of conventional weapons. It
isigned the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe, which called for
ireduction of tanks, artillery, and armoured vehicles (army forces were
ireduced
ito 300,000). The country planned to convert the current conscript-based
imilitary into a professional volunteer military.[225][better source needed]
iUkraine's current military consist of 196,600 active personnel and around
i900,000 reservists.[226]
i
iUkraine played an increasing role in peacekeeping operations. In 2014, the
iUkrainian frigate Hetman Sagaidachniy joined the European Union's counter
ipiracy Operation Atalanta and was part of the EU Naval Force off the coast of
iSomalia for two months.[227] Ukrainian troops were deployed in Kosovo as part
iof the Ukrainian-Polish Battalion.[228]
i
iIn 2003–05, a Ukrainian unit was deployed as part of the multinational force
iin Iraq under Polish command.[229]
i
iMilitary units of other states participated in multinational military
iexercises with Ukrainian forces in Ukraine regularly, including U.S. military
iforces.[230]
i
iFollowing independence, Ukraine declared itself a neutral state.[12] The
icountry had a limited military partnership with Russian Federation and other
iCIS countries and has had a partnership with NATO since 1994. In the 2000s,
ithe government was leaning towards NATO, and deeper cooperation with the
ialliance was set by the NATO-Ukraine Action Plan signed in 2002. It was later
iagreed that the question of joining NATO should be answered by a national
ireferendum at some point in the future.[225] Deposed President Viktor
iYanukovych considered the current level of co-operation between Ukraine and
iNATO sufficient, and was against Ukraine joining NATO. During the 2008
iBucharest summit, NATO declared that Ukraine would eventually become a member
iof NATO when it meets the criteria for accession.
i
iAs part of modernization after the beginning of the Russo-Ukrainian War in
i2014, junior officers were allowed to take more initiative and a territorial
idefense force of volunteers was established.[231] Various defensive weapons
iincluding drones were supplied by many countries, but not fighter jets.[232]
iDuring the first few weeks of the 2022 Russian invasion the military found it
idifficult to defend against shelling, missiles and high level bombing; but
ilight infantry used shoulder-mounted weapons effectively to destroy tanks,
iarmoured vehicles and low-flying aircraft.[233]
i
iThe system of Ukrainian subdivisions reflects the country's status as a
iunitary state (as stated in the country's constitution) with unified legal
iand
iadministrative regimes for each unit.
i
iIncluding Sevastopol and the Autonomous Republic of Crimea that were annexed
iby the Russian Federation in 2014, Ukraine consists of 27 regions:
itwenty-four
ioblasts (provinces), one autonomous republic (Autonomous Republic of Crimea),
iand two cities of special status—Kyiv, the capital, and Sevastopol. The 24
ioblasts and Crimea are subdivided into 136[234] raions (districts) and city
imunicipalities of regional significance, or second-level administrative
iunits.
i
iPopulated places in Ukraine are split into two categories: urban and rural.
iUrban populated places are split further into cities and urban-type
isettlements (a Soviet administrative invention), while rural populated places
iconsist of villages and settlements (a generally used term). All cities have
ia
icertain degree of self-rule depending on their significance such as national
isignificance (as in the case of Kyiv and Sevastopol), regional significance
i(within each oblast or autonomous republic) or district significance (all the
irest of cities). A city's significance depends on several factors such as its
ipopulation, socio-economic and historical importance and infrastructure.
i
i===== Economy =====
i
iIn 2021 agriculture was the biggest sector of the economy and Ukraine is one
iof the world's largest wheat exporters. However, Ukraine remains among the
ipoorest countries in Europe with the lowest nominal GDP per capita.[235] As
iof
i2022[update] corruption remained a widespread issue;[236][237] the country
iwas
irated 122nd out of 180 in the Corruption Perceptions Index for 2021, the
isecond-lowest result in Europe after Russia.[238][239] In 2021, Ukraine's GDP
iper capita by purchasing power parity was just over $14,000.[240] Despite
isupplying emergency financial support, the IMF expected the economy to shrink
iconsiderably by 35% in 2022 due to Russia's invasion.[241] One 2022 estimate
iwas that post-war reconstruction costs might reach half a trillion
idollars.[242]
i
iIn 2021, the average salary in Ukraine reached its highest level at almost
i₴14,300 (US$525) per month.[243] About 1% of Ukrainians lived below the
inational poverty line in 2019.[244] Unemployment in Ukraine was 4.5% in
i2019.[245] In 2019 5–15% of the Ukrainian population were categorized as
imiddle class.[246] In 2020 Ukraine's government debt was roughly 50% of its
inominal GDP.[247][248]
i
iIn 2021 mineral commodities and light industry were important sectors.[248]
iUkraine produces nearly all types of transportation vehicles and
ispacecraft.[249][250][251] Antonov airplanes and KrAZ trucks are exported to
imany countries. The European Union is the country's main trade partner, and
iremittances from Ukrainians working abroad are important.[248]
i
iUkraine is among the world's top agricultural producers and exporters and is
ioften described as the "bread basket of Europe". During the 2020/21
iinternational wheat marketing season (July–June), it ranked as the sixth
ilargest wheat exporter, accounting for nine percent of world wheat
itrade.[252]
iThe country is also a major global exporter of maize, barley and rapeseed. In
i2020/21, it accounted for 12 percent of global trade in maize and barley and
ifor 14 percent of world rapeseed exports. Its trade share is even greater in
ithe sunflower oil sector, with the country accounting for about 50 percent of
iworld exports in 2020/2021.[252]
i
iAccording to the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
i(FAO), further to causing the loss of lives and increasing humanitarian
ineeds,
ithe likely disruptions caused by the Russo-Ukrainian War to Ukraine's grain
iand oilseed sectors, could jeopardize the food security of many countries,
iespecially those that are highly dependent on Ukraine and Russia for their
ifood and fertilizer imports.[253] Several of these countries fall into the
iLeast Developed Country (LDC) group, while many others belong to the group of
iLow-Income Food-Deficit Countries (LIFDCs).[254][255] For example Eritrea
isourced 47 percent of its wheat imports in 2021 from Ukraine. Overall, more
ithan 30 nations depend on Ukraine and the Russian Federation for over 30
ipercent of their wheat import needs, many of them in North Africa and Western
iand Central Asia.[252]
i
iBefore the Russo-Ukrainian war the number of tourists visiting Ukraine was
ieighth in Europe, according to the World Tourism Organization rankings.[256]
iUkraine has numerous tourist attractions: mountain ranges suitable for
iskiing,
ihiking and fishing; the Black Sea coastline as a popular summer destination;
inature reserves of different ecosystems; and churches, castle ruins and other
iarchitectural and park landmarks. Kyiv, Lviv, Odesa and Kamyanets-Podilskyi
iwere Ukraine's principal tourist centres, each offering many historical
ilandmarks and extensive hospitality infrastructure. The Seven Wonders of
iUkraine and Seven Natural Wonders of Ukraine are selections of the most
iimportant landmarks of Ukraine, chosen by Ukrainian experts and an
iInternet-based public vote. Tourism was the mainstay of Crimea's economy
ibefore a major fall in visitor numbers following the Russian annexation in
i2014.[257]
i
iMany roads and bridges were destroyed, and international maritime travel was
iblocked by the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine.[241] Before that it was
imainly through the Port of Odesa, from where ferries sailed regularly to
iIstanbul, Varna and Haifa. The largest ferry company operating these routes
iwas Ukrferry.[258] There are over 1,600 km (1,000 mi) of navigable waterways
ion 7 rivers, mostly on the Danube, Dnieper and Pripyat. All Ukraine's rivers
ifreeze over in winter, limiting navigation.[259]
i
iUkraine's rail network connects all major urban areas, port facilities and
iindustrial centres with neighbouring countries.[citation needed] The heaviest
iconcentration of railway track is the Donbas region.[260] Although rail
ifreight transport fell in the 1990s, Ukraine is still one of the world's
ihighest rail users.[261]
i
iUkraine International Airlines, is the flag carrier and the largest
iairline,[262] with its head office in Kyiv[263] and its main hub at Kyiv's
iBoryspil International Airport. It operated domestic and international
ipassenger flights and cargo services to Europe, the Middle East, the United
iStates,[222] Canada,[264] and Asia.
i
iEnergy in Ukraine is mainly from gas and coal, followed by nuclear then
ioil.[170] The coal industry has been disrupted by conflict.[265] Most gas and
ioil is imported, but since 2015 energy policy has prioritised diversifying
ienergy supply.[266]
i
iAbout half of electricity generation is nuclear and a quarter coal.[170] The
ilargest nuclear power plant in Europe, the Zaporizhzhia Nuclear Power Plant,
iis in Ukraine. Fossil fuel subsidies were US$2.2 billion in 2019.[267] Until
ithe 2010s all of Ukraine's nuclear fuel came from Russia, but now most does
inot.[268]
i
iAlthough gas transit is declining, over 40 billion cubic metres (bcm) of
iRussian gas flowed through Ukraine in 2021,[269] which was about a third of
iRussian exports to other European countries.[270] Some energy infrastructure
iwas destroyed in the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine.[271][272]
i
iIn early 2022 Ukraine and Moldova decoupled their electricity grids from the
iIntegrated Power System of Russia and Belarus; and the European Network of
iTransmission System Operators for Electricity synchronized them with
icontinental Europe.[273][274]
i
iThe internet in the country is robust because it is diverse.[275] Key
iofficials may use Starlink as backup.[275] The IT industry contributed almost
i5 per cent to Ukraine's GDP in 2021[276] and in 2022 continued both inside
iand
ioutside the country.[277]
i
i===== Demographics =====
i
iSource: Ethnic composition of the population of Ukraine, 2001 Census
i
iBefore the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine the country had an estimated
ipopulation of over 41 million people, and was the eighth-most populous
icountry
iin Europe. It is a heavily urbanized country, and its industrial regions in
ithe east and southeast are the most densely populated—about 67% of its total
ipopulation lives in urban areas.[278] At that time Ukraine had a population
idensity of 69.5 inhabitants per square kilometre (180 per square mile), and
ithe overall life expectancy in the country at birth was 73 years (68 years
ifor
imales and 77.8 years for females).[279]
i
iFollowing the dissolution of the Soviet Union, Ukraine's population hit a
ipeak of roughly 52 million in 1993. However, due to its death rate exceeding
iits birth rate, mass emigration, poor living conditions, and low-quality
ihealth care,[280][281] the total population decreased by 6.6 million, or
i12.8%
ifrom the same year to 2014.
i
iAccording to the 2001 census, ethnic Ukrainians made up roughly 78% of the
ipopulation, while Russians were the largest minority, at some 17.3% of the
ipopulation. Small minority populations included: Belarusians (0.6%),
iMoldovans
i(0.5%), Crimean Tatars (0.5%), Bulgarians (0.4%), Hungarians (0.3%),
iRomanians
i(0.3%), Poles (0.3%), Jews (0.3%), Armenians (0.2%), Greeks (0.2%) and Tatars
i(0.2%).[2] It was also estimated that there were about 10–40,000 Koreans in
iUkraine, who lived mostly in the south of the country, belonging to the
ihistorical Koryo-saram group.[282][283]
i
iOutside the former Soviet Union, the largest source of incoming immigrants in
iUkraine's post-independence period was from four Asian countries, namely
iChina, India, Pakistan and Afghanistan.[284]
i
iIn the late 2010s 1.4 million Ukrainians were internally displaced due to the
iwar in Donbas,[285] and in early 2022 over 4.1 million fled the country in
ithe
iaftermath of the Russian invasion.[286]
i
iAccording to Ukraine's constitution, the state language is Ukrainian.[287]
iRussian is widely spoken in the country, especially in eastern and southern
iUkraine.[287][288] Most native Ukrainian speakers know Russian as a second
ilanguage.[287] Russian was the de facto dominant language of the Soviet Union
ibut Ukrainian also held official status in the republic,[289] and in the
ischools of the Ukrainian SSR, learning Ukrainian was mandatory.[287]
i
iEffective in August 2012, a new law on regional languages entitled any local
ilanguage spoken by at least a 10 percent minority be declared official within
ithat area.[290] Within weeks, Russian was declared a regional language of
iseveral southern and eastern oblasts (provinces) and cities.[291] Russian
icould then be used in the administrative office work and documents of those
iplaces.[292][293]
i
iOn 23 February 2014, following the Revolution of Dignity, the Ukrainian
iParliament voted to repeal the law on regional languages, making Ukrainian
ithe
isole state language at all levels; however, the repeal was not signed by
iacting President Turchynov or by President Poroshenko.[294][295][296] In
iFebruary 2019, the law allowing for official use of regional languages was
ifound unconstitutional.[297] According to the Council of Europe, this act
ifails to achieve fair protection of the linguistic rights of minorities.[298]
i
iUkrainian is the primary language used in the vast majority of Ukraine. 67%
iof Ukrainians speak Ukrainian as their primary language, while 30% speak
iRussian as their primary language.[299] In eastern and southern Ukraine,
iRussian is the primary language in some cities, while Ukrainian is used in
irural areas. Hungarian is spoken in Zakarpattia Oblast.[300] There is no
iconsensus among scholars whether Rusyn, also spoken in Zakarpattia, is a
idistinct language or a dialect of Ukrainian.[301] The Ukrainian government
idoes not recognise Rusyn and Rusyns as a distinct language and people.[302]
i
iFor a large part of the Soviet era, the number of Ukrainian speakers declined
ifrom generation to generation, and by the mid-1980s, the usage of the
iUkrainian language in public life had decreased significantly.[303] Following
iindependence, the government of Ukraine began restoring the use of the
iUkrainian language in schools and government through a policy of
iUkrainisation.[304][305] Today, most foreign films and TV programs, including
iRussian ones, are subtitled or dubbed in Ukrainian.[306] Ukraine's 2017
ieducation law bars primary education in public schools in grade five and up
iin
iany language but Ukrainian.[307][308]
i
iUkraine has the world's second-largest Eastern Orthodox population, after
iRussia.[316][317] A 2021 survey conducted by the Kyiv International Institute
iof Sociology (KIIS) found that 82% of Ukrainians declared themselves to be
ireligious, while 7% were atheists, and a further 11% found it difficult to
ianswer the question.[318] The level of religiosity in Ukraine was reported to
ibe the highest in Western Ukraine (91%), and the lowest in the Donbas (57%)
iand Eastern Ukraine (56%).[319]
i
iIn 2019, 82% of Ukrainians were Christians; out of which 72.7% declared
ithemselves to be Eastern Orthodox, 8.8% Ukrainian Greek Catholics, 2.3%
iProtestants and 0.9% Latin Church Catholics. Other Christians comprised 2.3%.
iJudaism, Islam, and Hinduism were the religions of 0.2% of the population
ieach. According to the KIIS study, roughly 58.3% of the Ukrainian Orthodox
ipopulation were members of the Orthodox Church of Ukraine, and 25.4% were
imembers of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church (Moscow Patriarchate).[320]
i
iAccording to a 2018 survey by the Razumkov Centre, 9.4% of Ukrainians were
iByzantine Rite Catholics and 0.8% were Latin Rite Catholics.[321] Protestants
iare a growing community in Ukraine, who made up 1.9% of the population in
i2016,[321] but rose to 2.2% of the population in 2018.
i
iUkraine's healthcare system is state subsidised and freely available to all
iUkrainian citizens and registered residents. However, it is not compulsory to
ibe treated in a state-run hospital as a number of private medical complexes
ido
iexist nationwide.[322] The public sector employs most healthcare
iprofessionals, with those working for private medical centres typically also
iretaining their state employment as they are mandated to provide care at
ipublic health facilities on a regular basis.[323]
i
iAll of Ukraine's medical service providers and hospitals are subordinate to
ithe Ministry of Healthcare, which provides oversight and scrutiny of general
imedical practice as well as being responsible for the day-to-day
iadministration of the healthcare system. Despite this, standards of hygiene
iand patient-care have fallen.[324]
i
iUkraine faces a number of major public health issues and is considered to be
iin a demographic crisis because of its high death rate and low birth rate
i(the
iUkrainian birth rate is 11 births/1,000 population, and the death rate is
i16.3
ideaths/1,000 population).[citation needed] A factor contributing to the high
ideath rate is a high mortality rate among working-age males from preventable
icauses such as alcohol poisoning and smoking.[325]
i
iActive reformation of Ukraine's healthcare system was initiated right after
ithe appointment of Ulana Suprun as a head of the Ministry of Healthcare.[326]
iAssisted by deputy Pavlo Kovtoniuk, Suprun first changed the distribution of
ifinances in healthcare.[327] Funds must follow the patient. General
ipractitioners will provide basic care for patients. The patient will have the
iright to choose one. Emergency medical service is considered to be fully
ifunded by the state. Emergency Medicine Reform is also an important part of
ithe healthcare reform. In addition, patients who suffer from chronic
idiseases,
iwhich cause a high toll of disability and mortality, are provided with free
ior
ilow-price medicine.[328]
i
iAccording to the Ukrainian constitution, access to free education is granted
ito all citizens. Complete general secondary education is compulsory in the
istate schools which constitute the overwhelming majority. Free higher
ieducation in state and communal educational establishments is provided on a
icompetitive basis.[329]
i
iBecause of the Soviet Union's emphasis on total access of education for all
icitizens, which continues today, the literacy rate is an estimated 99.4%.[49]
iSince 2005, an eleven-year school programme has been replaced with a
itwelve-year one: primary education takes four years to complete (starting at
iage six), middle education (secondary) takes five years to complete; upper
isecondary then takes three years.[330] Students in the 12th grade take
iGovernment tests, which are also referred to as school-leaving exams. These
itests are later used for university admissions.
i
iAmong the oldest is also the Lviv University, founded in 1661. More higher
ieducation institutions were set up in the 19th century, beginning with
iuniversities in Kharkiv (1805), Kyiv (1834), Odesa (1865) and Chernivtsi
i(1875) and a number of professional higher education institutions, e.g.:
iNizhyn Historical and Philological Institute (originally established as the
iGymnasium of Higher Sciences in 1805), a Veterinary Institute (1873) and a
iTechnological Institute (1885) in Kharkiv, a Polytechnic Institute in Kyiv
i(1898) and a Higher Mining School (1899) in Katerynoslav. Rapid growth
ifollowed in the Soviet period. By 1988 the number of higher education
iinstitutions increased to 146 with over 850,000 students.[331]
i
iThe Ukrainian higher education system comprises higher educational
iestablishments, scientific and methodological facilities under national,
imunicipal and self-governing bodies in charge of education.[332] The
iorganisation of higher education in Ukraine is built up in accordance with
ithe
istructure of education of the world's higher developed countries, as is
idefined by UNESCO and the UN.[333]
i
iUkraine produces the fourth largest number of post-secondary graduates in
iEurope, while being ranked seventh in population.[334] Higher education is
ieither state funded or private. Most universities provide subsidised housing
ifor out-of-city students. It is common for libraries to supply required books
ifor all registered students. Ukrainian universities confer two degrees: the
ibachelor's degree (4 years) and the master's degree (5–6th year), in
iaccordance with the Bologna process. Historically, Specialist degree (usually
i5 years) is still also granted; it was the only degree awarded by
iuniversities
iin Soviet times.[335] Ukraine was ranked 57th in 2022 in the Global
iInnovation
iIndex, down from 49th in 2021[336] [337]
i
iUkrainian is the dominant language in Western Ukraine and in Central Ukraine,
iwhile Russian is the dominant language in the cities of Eastern Ukraine and
iSouthern Ukraine. In the Ukrainian SSR schools, learning Russian was
imandatory; in modern Ukraine, schools with Ukrainian as the language of
iinstruction offer classes in Russian and in the other minority
ilanguages.[287][338][339][340]
i
iOn the Russian language, on Soviet Union and Ukrainian nationalism, opinion
iin Eastern Ukraine and Southern Ukraine tends to be the exact opposite of
ithose in Western Ukraine; while opinions in Central Ukraine on these topics
itend be less extreme.[339][341][342][343]
i
iSimilar historical cleavages also remain evident at the level of individual
isocial identification. Attitudes toward the most important political issue,
irelations with Russia, differed strongly between Lviv, identifying more with
iUkrainian nationalism and the Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church, and Donetsk,
ipredominantly Russian orientated and favourable to the Soviet era, while in
icentral and southern Ukraine, as well as Kyiv, such divisions were less
iimportant and there was less antipathy toward people from other regions (a
ipoll by the Research & Branding Group held March 2010 showed that the
iattitude
iof the citizens of Donetsk to the citizens of Lviv was 79% positive and that
ithe attitude of the citizens of Lviv to the citizens of Donetsk was 88%
ipositive).[344]
i
iHowever, all were united by an overarching Ukrainian identity based on shared
ieconomic difficulties, showing that other attitudes are determined more by
iculture and politics than by demographic differences.[344][345] Surveys of
iregional identities in Ukraine have shown that the feeling of belonging to a
i"Soviet identity" is strongest in the Donbas (about 40%) and the Crimea
i(about
i30%).[346]
i
iDuring elections voters of Western and Central Ukrainian oblasts (provinces)
ivote mostly for parties (Our Ukraine, Batkivshchyna)[347][348] and
ipresidential candidates (Viktor Yuschenko, Yulia Tymoshenko) with a
ipro-Western and state reform platform, while voters in Southern and Eastern
ioblasts vote for parties (CPU, Party of Regions) and presidential candidates
i(Viktor Yanukovych) with a pro-Russian and status quo
iplatform.[349][350][351][352] However, this geographical division is
idecreasing.[353][354][355]
i
i===== Culture =====
i
iUkrainian customs are heavily influenced by Orthodox Christianity, the
idominant religion in the country.[356] Gender roles also tend to be more
itraditional, and grandparents play a greater role in bringing up children,
ithan in the West.[357] The culture of Ukraine has also been influenced by its
ieastern and western neighbours, reflected in its architecture, music and
iart.[358]
i
iThe Communist era had quite a strong effect on the art and writing of
iUkraine.[359] In 1932, Stalin made socialist realism state policy in the
iSoviet Union when he promulgated the decree "On the Reconstruction of
iLiterary
iand Art Organisations". This greatly stifled creativity. During the 1980s
iglasnost (openness) was introduced and Soviet artists and writers again
ibecame
ifree to express themselves as they wanted.[360]
i
iAs of 2023[update], UNESCO inscribed 8 properties in Ukraine on the World
iHeritage List. Ukraine is also known for its decorative and folk traditions
isuch as Petrykivka painting, Kosiv ceramics, and Cossack
isongs.[361][362][363][364] Between February 2022 and March 2023, UNESCO
iverified the damage to 247 sites, including 107 religious sites, 89 buildings
iof artistic or historical interest, 19 monuments and 12 libraries.[365] Since
iJanuary 2023, the historic centre of Odesa has been inscribed on the List of
iWorld Heritage in Danger.[366]
i
iThe tradition of the Easter egg, known as pysanky, has long roots in Ukraine.
iThese eggs were drawn on with wax to create a pattern; then, the dye was
iapplied to give the eggs their pleasant colours, the dye did not affect the
ipreviously wax-coated parts of the egg. After the entire egg was dyed, the
iwax
iwas removed leaving only the colourful pattern. This tradition is thousands
iof
iyears old, and precedes the arrival of Christianity to Ukraine.[367] In the
icity of Kolomyia near the foothills of the Carpathian Mountains, the museum
iof
iPysanka was built in 2000 and won a nomination as the monument of modern
iUkraine in 2007, part of the Seven Wonders of Ukraine action.
i
iThe Vernadsky National Library of Ukraine, is the main academic library and
imain scientific information centre in Ukraine.
i
iDuring the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine the Russians bombed the
iMaksymovych Scientific Library of the Taras Shevchenko Kyiv National
iUniversity, Vernadsky National Library of Ukraine, the National Scientific
iMedical Library of Ukraine and the Kyiv city youth library.[368]
i
iUkrainian literature has origins in Old Church Slavonic writings, which was
iused as a liturgical and literary language following Christianization in the
i10th and 11th centuries.[369][370][better source needed][g] Other writings
ifrom the time include chronicles, the most significant of which was the
iPrimary Chronicle.[citation needed] Literary activity faced a sudden decline
iafter the Mongol invasion of Kievan Rus', before seeing a revival beginning
iin
ithe 14th century, and was advanced in the 16th century with the invention of
ithe printing press.[369]
i
iThe Cossacks established an independent society and popularized a new kind of
iepic poem, which marked a high point of Ukrainian oral
iliterature.[370][failed
iverification] These advances were then set back in the 17th and early 18th
icenturies, as many Ukrainian authors wrote in Russian or Polish. Nonetheless,
iby the late 18th century, the modern literary Ukrainian language finally
iemerged.[369] In 1798, the modern era of the Ukrainian literary tradition
ibegan with Ivan Kotlyarevsky's publication of Eneida in the Ukrainian
ivernacular.[371]
i
iBy the 1830s, a Ukrainian romantic literature began to develop, and the
ination's most renowned cultural figure, romanticist poet-painter Taras
iShevchenko emerged. Whereas Ivan Kotliarevsky is considered to be the father
iof literature in the Ukrainian vernacular; Shevchenko is the father of a
inational revival.[372]
i
iThen, in 1863, the use of the Ukrainian language in print was effectively
iprohibited by the Russian Empire.[71] This severely curtailed literary
iactivity in the area, and Ukrainian writers were forced to either publish
itheir works in Russian or release them in Austrian controlled Galicia. The
iban
iwas never officially lifted, but it became obsolete after the revolution and
ithe Bolsheviks' coming to power.[370]
i
iUkrainian literature continued to flourish in the early Soviet years when
inearly all literary trends were approved. These policies faced a steep
idecline
iin the 1930s, when prominent representatives as well as many others were
ikilled by the NKVD during the Great Purge. In general around 223 writers were
irepressed by what was known as the Executed Renaissance.[373] These
irepressions were part of Stalin's implemented policy of socialist realism.
iThe
idoctrine did not necessarily repress the use of the Ukrainian language, but
iit
irequired that writers follow a certain style in their works.
i
iLiterary freedom grew in the late 1980s and early 1990s alongside the decline
iand collapse of the USSR and the reestablishment of Ukrainian independence in
i1991.[369]
i
iUkrainian architecture includes the motifs and styles that are found in
istructures built in modern Ukraine, and by Ukrainians worldwide. These
iinclude
iinitial roots which were established in the state of Kievan Rus'. Following
ithe Christianization of Kievan Rus', Ukrainian architecture has been
iinfluenced by Byzantine architecture. After the Mongol invasion of Kievan
iRus', it continued to develop in the Kingdom of Galicia-Volhynia.[374]
i
iAfter the union with the Tsardom of Russia, architecture in Ukraine began to
idevelop in different directions, with many structures in the larger eastern,
iRussian-ruled area built in the styles of Russian architecture of that
iperiod,
iwhilst the western region of Galicia developed under Polish and
iAustro-Hungarian architectural influences. Ukrainian national motifs would
ieventually be used during the period of the Soviet Union and in modern
iindependent Ukraine.[374] However, much of the contemporary architectural
iskyline of Ukraine is dominated by Soviet-style Khrushchyovkas, or low-cost
iapartment buildings.[375]
i
iArtisan textile arts play an important role in Ukrainian culture,[376]
iespecially in Ukrainian wedding traditions. Ukrainian embroidery, weaving and
ilace-making are used in traditional folk dress and in traditional
icelebrations. Ukrainian embroidery varies depending on the region of
iorigin[377] and the designs have a long history of motifs, compositions,
ichoice of colours and types of stitches.[378] Use of colour is very important
iand has roots in Ukrainian folklore. Embroidery motifs found in different
iparts of Ukraine are preserved in the Rushnyk Museum in Pereiaslav.
i
iNational dress is woven and highly decorated. Weaving with handmade looms is
istill practised in the village of Krupove, situated in Rivne Oblast. The
ivillage is the birthplace of two internationally recognized personalities in
ithe scene of national crafts fabrication: Nina Myhailivna[379] and Uliana
iPetrivna.[380]
i
iMusic is a major part of Ukrainian culture, with a long history and many
iinfluences. From traditional folk music, to classical and modern rock,
iUkraine
ihas produced several internationally recognised musicians including Kirill
iKarabits, Okean Elzy and Ruslana. Elements from traditional Ukrainian folk
imusic made their way into Western music and even into modern jazz. Ukrainian
imusic sometimes presents a perplexing mix of exotic melismatic singing with
ichordal harmony. The most striking general characteristic of authentic ethnic
iUkrainian folk music is the wide use of minor modes or keys which incorporate
iaugmented second intervals.[382]
i
iDuring the Baroque period, music had a place of considerable importance in
ithe curriculum of the Kyiv-Mohyla Academy. Much of the nobility was well
iversed in music with many Ukrainian Cossack leaders such as (Mazepa, Paliy,
iHolovatyj, Sirko) being accomplished players of the kobza, bandura or torban.
i
iThe first dedicated musical academy was set up in Hlukhiv in 1738 and
istudents were taught to sing and play violin and bandura from manuscripts. As
ia result, many of the earliest composers and performers within the Russian
iempire were ethnically Ukrainian, having been born or educated in Hlukhiv or
ihaving been closely associated with this music school.[383] Ukrainian
iclassical music differs considerably depending on whether the composer was of
iUkrainian ethnicity living in Ukraine, a composer of non-Ukrainian ethnicity
iwho was a citizen of Ukraine, or part of the Ukrainian diaspora.[384]
i
iSince the mid-1960s, Western-influenced pop music has been growing in
ipopularity in Ukraine. Folk singer and harmonium player Mariana Sadovska is
iprominent. Ukrainian pop and folk music arose with the international
ipopularity of groups and performers like Vopli Vidoplyasova, Dakh Daughters,
iDakha Brakha, Ivan Dorn and Okean Elzy.
i
iThe Ukrainian legal framework on media freedom is deemed "among the most
iprogressive in eastern Europe", although implementation has been
iuneven.[385][needs update] The constitution and laws provide for freedom of
ispeech[386] and press. The main regulatory authority for the broadcast media
iis the National Television and Radio Broadcasting Council of Ukraine
i(NTRBCU),
itasked with licensing media outlets and ensure their compliance with the
ilaw.[387]
i
iKyiv dominates the media sector in Ukraine: National newspapers Den, Dzerkalo
iTyzhnia, tabloids, such as The Ukrainian Week or Focus, and television and
iradio are largely based there,[citation needed] although Lviv is also a
isignificant national media centre. The National News Agency of Ukraine,
iUkrinform was founded here in 1918. BBC Ukrainian started its broadcasts in
i1992.[388] As of 2022[update] 75% of the population use the internet, and
isocial media is widely used by government and people.[389]
i
iUkraine greatly benefited from the Soviet emphasis on physical education.
iThese policies left Ukraine with hundreds of stadia, swimming pools, gymnasia
iand many other athletic facilities.[390] The most popular sport is football.
iThe top professional league is the Vyscha Liha ("premier league").
i
iMany Ukrainians also played for the Soviet national football team, most
inotably Ballon d'Or winners Ihor Belanov and Oleh Blokhin. This award was
ionly
ipresented to one Ukrainian after the dissolution of the Soviet Union, Andriy
iShevchenko. The national team made its debut in the 2006 FIFA World Cup, and
ireached the quarterfinals before losing to eventual champions, Italy.
i
iUkrainian boxers are amongst the best in the world.[391] Since becoming the
iundisputed cruiserweight champion in 2018, Oleksandr Usyk has also gone on to
iwin the unified WBA (Super), IBF, WBO and IBO heavyweight titles. This feat
imade him one of only three boxers to have unified the cruiserweight world
ititles and become a world heavyweight champion.[392] The brothers Vitali and
iWladimir Klitschko are former heavyweight world champions who held multiple
iworld titles throughout their careers. Also hailing from Ukraine is Vasyl
iLomachenko, a 2008 and 2012 Olympic gold medalist. He is the unified
ilightweight world champion who ties the record for winning a world title in
ithe fewest professional fights; three. As of September 2018, he is ranked as
ithe world's best active boxer, pound for pound, by ESPN.[393]
i
iSergey Bubka held the record in the Pole vault from 1993 to 2014; with great
istrength, speed and gymnastic abilities, he was voted the world's best
iathlete
ion several occasions.[394][395]
i
iBasketball has gained popularity in Ukraine. In 2011, Ukraine was granted a
iright to organize EuroBasket 2015. Two years later the Ukraine national
ibasketball team finished sixth in EuroBasket 2013 and qualified to FIBA World
iCup for the first time in its history. Euroleague participant Budivelnyk Kyiv
iis the strongest professional basketball club in Ukraine.
i
iChess is a popular sport in Ukraine. Ruslan Ponomariov is the former world
ichampion. There are about 85 Grandmasters and 198 International Masters in
iUkraine. Rugby league is played throughout Ukraine.[396]
i
iThe traditional Ukrainian diet includes chicken, pork, beef, fish and
imushrooms. Ukrainians also tend to eat a lot of potatoes; grains; and fresh,
iboiled or pickled vegetables. Popular traditional dishes varenyky (boiled
idumplings with mushrooms, potatoes, sauerkraut, cottage cheese, cherries or
iberries), nalysnyky (pancakes with cottage cheese, poppy seeds, mushrooms,
icaviar or meat), kapusnyak (cabbage soup made with meat, potatoes, carrots,
ionions, millet, tomato paste, spices and fresh herbs), borscht (soup made of
ibeets, cabbage and mushrooms or meat) and holubtsy (stuffed cabbage rolls
ifilled with rice, carrots, onion and minced meat).[397] Among traditional
ibaked goods are decorated korovais and paska Easter bread.[398] Ukrainian
ispecialties also include Chicken Kiev and Kyiv cake.
i
iUkrainians drink stewed fruit compote, juices, milk, buttermilk, mineral
iwater, tea and coffee, beer, wine and horilka.[399]
i
i===== See also =====
i
i===== Notes =====
i
ia. ^ Among the Ukrainians that rose to the highest offices in the Russian
iEmpire were Aleksey Razumovsky, Alexander Bezborodko and Ivan Paskevich.
iAmong
ithe Ukrainians who greatly influenced the Russian Orthodox Church in this
iperiod were Stephen Yavorsky, Feofan Prokopovich and Dimitry of Rostov.
i
ib. ^ Estimates on the number of deaths vary. Official Soviet data is not
iavailable because the Soviet government denied the existence of the famine.
iSee the Holodomor article for details. Sources differ on interpreting various
istatements from different branches of different governments as to whether
ithey
iamount to the official recognition of the Famine as Genocide by the country.
iFor example, after the statement issued by the Latvian Sejm on 13 March 2008,
ithe total number of countries is given as 19 (according to Ukrainian BBC:
i"Латвія визнала Голодомор ґеноцидом"), 16 (according to Korrespondent,
iRussian
iedition: "После продолжительных дебатов Сейм Латвии признал Голодомор
iгеноцидом украинцев"), "more than 10" (according to Korrespondent, Ukrainian
iedition: "Латвія визнала Голодомор 1932–33 рр. геноцидом українців")
iRetrieved
i27 January 2008.
i
ic. 1 2 These figures are likely to be much higher, as they do not include
iUkrainians of other nationalities or Ukrainian Jews, but only ethnic
iUkrainians, from the Ukrainian SSR.
i
id. ^ This figure excludes POW deaths.
i
ie. ^ Several countries with territory in Europe have a larger total area, but
iall of those also include territory outside of Europe. Only Russia's European
iterritory is larger than Ukraine.
i
if. 1 2 3 According to the official 2001 census data (by nationality;[400] by
ilanguage[401]) about 75 percent of Kyiv's population responded 'Ukrainian' to
ithe native language (ridna mova) census question, and roughly 25 percent
iresponded 'Russian'. On the other hand, when the question 'What language do
iyou use in everyday life?' was asked in the 2003 sociological survey, the
iKyivans' answers were distributed as follows: 'mostly Russian': 52 percent,
i'both Russian and Ukrainian in equal measure': 32 percent, 'mostly
iUkrainian':
i14 percent, 'exclusively Ukrainian': 4.3 percent. "What language is spoken in
iUkraine?". Welcome to Ukraine. February 2003. Archived from the original on
i11
iOctober 2017. Retrieved 11 July 2008.
i
ig. ^ Such writings were also the base for Russian and Belarusian literature.
i
i===== References =====
i
i===== Print sources =====
i
i===== External links =====
i
i}}
i
i
i
i  ------------- SOURCE ----------------
i
iURL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ukraine
i
iLICENSE: Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike
i
i=========================================
i
i
i$
Bt:Ukraine - Wikipedia	/x/w/g/https_58__47__47_en_46_wikipedia_46_org_47_wiki_47_Ukraine	texopher.com	70
