i
1[?] Read Details	/x/w/gd/https_58__47__47_en_46_wikipedia_46_org_47_wiki_47_Lady_95_Gaga	texopher.com	70
i
i===== Contents =====
i
iStefani Joanne Angelina Germanotta (/ˈstɛfəni ˌdʒɜːrməˈnɒtə/ (listen)
iSTEF-ən-ee JUR-mə-NOT-ə; born March 28, 1986), known professionally as Lady
iGaga, is an American singer, songwriter, and actress. She is known for her
iimage reinventions and versatility in the entertainment industry. Gaga began
iperforming as a teenager, singing at open mic nights and acting in school
iplays. She studied at Collaborative Arts Project 21, through the New York
iUniversity Tisch School of the Arts, before dropping out to pursue a career
iin
imusic. After Def Jam Recordings canceled her contract, she worked as a
isongwriter for Sony/ATV Music Publishing, where she signed a joint deal with
iInterscope Records and KonLive Distribution, in 2007. Gaga had her
ibreakthrough the following year with her debut studio album, The Fame, and
iits
ichart-topping singles "Just Dance" and "Poker Face". The album was later
ireissued to include the extended play The Fame Monster (2009), which yielded
ithe successful singles "Bad Romance", "Telephone", and "Alejandro".
i
iGaga's five succeeding albums all debuted atop the US Billboard 200. Her
isecond full-length album, Born This Way (2011), explored electronic rock and
itechno-pop and sold more than one million copies in its first week. The title
itrack became the fastest-selling song on the iTunes Store, with over one
imillion downloads in less than a week. Following her EDM-influenced third
ialbum, Artpop (2013), and its lead single "Applause", Gaga released the jazz
ialbum Cheek to Cheek (2014) with Tony Bennett, and the soft rock album Joanne
i(2016). She ventured into acting, winning awards for her leading roles in the
iminiseries American Horror Story: Hotel (2015–2016) and the musical film A
iStar Is Born (2018). Her contributions to the latter's soundtrack, which
ispawned the chart-topping single "Shallow", made her the first woman to win
ian
iAcademy Award, BAFTA Award, Golden Globe Award, and Grammy Award in one year.
iGaga returned to dance-pop with her sixth studio album, Chromatica (2020),
iwhich yielded the number-one single "Rain on Me". She both released her
isecond
icollaborative album with Bennett, Love for Sale, and starred in the biopic
iHouse of Gucci in 2021.
i
iHaving sold an estimated 170 million records, Gaga is one of the world's
ibest-selling music artists and the only female artist to achieve four singles
ieach selling at least 10 million copies globally. Her accolades include 13
iGrammy Awards, two Golden Globe Awards, 18 MTV Video Music Awards, awards
ifrom
ithe Songwriters Hall of Fame and the Council of Fashion Designers of America,
iand recognition as Billboard's Artist of the Year (2010) and Woman of the
iYear
i(2015). She has also been included in several Forbes' power rankings and
iranked fourth on VH1's Greatest Women in Music (2012). Time magazine named
iher
ione of the 100 most influential people in the world in 2010 and 2019 and
iplaced her on their All-Time 100 Fashion Icons list. Her philanthropy and
iactivism focus on mental health awareness and LGBT rights; she has her own
inon-profit organization, the Born This Way Foundation, which supports the
iwellness of young people. Gaga's business ventures include Haus Labs, a vegan
icosmetics brand launched in 2019.
i
i===== Life and career =====
i
iStefani Joanne Angelina Germanotta was born on March 28, 1986, at Lenox Hill
iHospital in Manhattan, New York City,[1] to an upper middle class Catholic
ifamily. Both of her parents have Italian ancestry.[2] Her parents are Cynthia
iLouise (née Bissett), a philanthropist and business executive, and Internet
ientrepreneur Joseph Germanotta,[3] and she has a younger sister named
iNatali.[4] Brought up on the Upper West Side of Manhattan, Gaga said in an
iinterview that her parents came from lower-class families and worked hard for
ieverything.[5][6] From age 11, she attended the Convent of the Sacred Heart,
ia
iprivate all-girls Roman Catholic school.[7] Gaga has described her
ihigh-school
iself as "very dedicated, very studious, very disciplined" but also "a bit
iinsecure". She considered herself a misfit and was mocked for "being either
itoo provocative or too eccentric".[8]
i
iGaga began playing the piano at age four when her mother insisted she become
i"a cultured young woman". She took piano lessons and practiced through her
ichildhood. The lessons taught her to create music by ear, which Gaga
ipreferred
iover reading sheet music. Her parents encouraged her to pursue music and
ienrolled her in Creative Arts Camp.[9] As a teenager, she played at open mic
inights.[10] Gaga played the lead roles of Adelaide in the play Guys and Dolls
iand Philia in the play A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum at
iRegis
iHigh School.[11] She also studied method acting at the Lee Strasberg Theatre
iand Film Institute for ten years.[12] Gaga unsuccessfully auditioned for New
iYork shows, though did appear in a small background role as a high-school
istudent in a 2001 episode of The Sopranos titled "The Telltale
iMoozadell".[13][14] She later said of her inclination towards music:
i
iI don't know exactly where my affinity for music comes from, but it is the
ithing that comes easiest to me. When I was like three years old, I may have
ibeen even younger, my mom always tells this really embarrassing story of me
ipropping myself up and playing the keys like this because I was too young and
ishort to get all the way up there. Just go like this on the low end of the
ipiano ... I was really, really good at piano, so my first instincts were to
iwork so hard at practicing piano, and I might not have been a natural dancer,
ibut I am a natural musician. That is the thing that I believe I am the
igreatest at.[15]
i
iIn 2003, at age 17, Gaga gained early admission to Collaborative Arts Project
i21, a music school at New York University (NYU)'s Tisch School of the Arts,
iand lived in an NYU dorm. She studied music there, and improved her
isongwriting skills by writing essays on art, religion, social issues and
ipolitics, including a thesis on pop artists Spencer Tunick and Damien
iHirst.[16][17] In 2005, Gaga withdrew from school during the second semester
iof her second year to focus on her music career.[18] That year, she also
iplayed an unsuspecting diner customer for MTV's Boiling Points, a prank
ireality television show.[19]
i
iIn a 2014 interview, Gaga said she had been raped at age 19, and later
iunderwent mental and physical therapy for this.[20] She has post-traumatic
istress disorder (PTSD) and attributes it to the incident, and has credited
isupport from doctors, family and friends with helping her.[21] Gaga later
igave
iadditional details about the rape, including that "the person who raped me
idropped me off pregnant on a corner at my parents' house because I was
ivomiting and sick. Because I'd been being abused. I was locked away in a
istudio for months."[22]
i
iIn 2005, Gaga recorded two songs with hip-hop artist Melle Mel for an audio
ibook accompanying Cricket Casey's children's novel The Portal in the
iPark.[23]
iShe also formed a band called the SGBand with some friends from NYU.[11][24]
iThey played gigs around New York and became a fixture of the downtown Lower
iEast Side club scene.[11] After the 2006 Songwriters Hall of Fame New
iSongwriters Showcase at the Cutting Room in June, talent scout Wendy Starland
irecommended her to music producer Rob Fusari.[25] Fusari collaborated with
iGaga, who traveled daily to New Jersey, helping to develop her songs and
icompose new material.[26] The producer said they began dating in May 2006,
iand
iclaimed to have been the first person to call her "Lady Gaga", which was
iderived from Queen's song "Radio Ga Ga".[27] Their relationship lasted until
iJanuary 2007.[28]
i
iFusari and Gaga established a company called "Team Lovechild, LLC" to promote
iher career.[27] They recorded and produced electropop tracks, sending them to
imusic industry executives. Joshua Sarubin, the head of Artists and repertoire
i(A&R) at Def Jam Recordings, responded positively and, after approval from
iSarubin's boss Antonio "L.A." Reid, Gaga was signed to Def Jam in September
i2006.[29][30] She was dropped from the label three months later[31] and
ireturned to her family home for Christmas. Gaga began performing at
ineo-burlesque shows, which according to her represented freedom.[32] During
ithis time, she met performance artist Lady Starlight, who helped mold her
ionstage persona.[33] The pair began performing at downtown club venues like
ithe Mercury Lounge, the Bitter End, and the Rockwood Music Hall. Their live
iperformance art piece, known as "Lady Gaga and the Starlight Revue" and
ibilled
ias "The Ultimate Pop Burlesque Rockshow", was a tribute to 1970s variety
iacts.[34][35] They performed at the 2007 Lollapalooza music festival.[34]
i
iHaving initially focused on avant-garde electronic dance music, Gaga began to
iincorporate pop melodies and the glam rock style of David Bowie and Queen
iinto
iher songs. While Gaga and Starlight were performing, Fusari continued to
idevelop the songs he had created with her, sending them to the producer and
irecord executive Vincent Herbert.[36] In November 2007, Herbert signed Gaga
ito
ihis label Streamline Records, an imprint of Interscope Records, established
ithat month.[37] Gaga later credited Herbert as the man who discovered
iher.[38]
iHaving served as an apprentice songwriter during an internship at Famous
iMusic
iPublishing, Gaga struck a music publishing deal with Sony/ATV. As a result,
ishe was hired to write songs for Britney Spears, New Kids on the Block,
iFergie, and the Pussycat Dolls.[39] At Interscope, musician Akon was
iimpressed
iwith her singing abilities when she sang a reference vocal for one of his
itracks in studio.[40] Akon convinced Jimmy Iovine, chairman and CEO of
iInterscope Geffen A&M Records (a brother company for Def Jam), to form a
ijoint
ideal by having Gaga also sign with his own label KonLive, making her his
i"franchise player".[31][41]
i
iIn late 2007, Gaga met with songwriter and producer RedOne.[42] She
icollaborated with him in the recording studio for a week on her debut album,
isigning with Cherrytree Records, an Interscope imprint established by
iproducer
iand songwriter Martin Kierszenbaum; she also wrote four songs with
iKierszenbaum.[39] Despite securing a record deal, she said that some radio
istations found her music too "racy", "dance-oriented", and "underground" for
ithe mainstream market, to which she replied: "My name is Lady Gaga, I've been
ion the music scene for years, and I'm telling you, this is what's next."[7]
i
iBy 2008, Gaga had relocated to Los Angeles to work extensively with her
irecord label to complete her debut album, The Fame, and to set up her own
icreative team called the Haus of Gaga, modeled on Andy Warhol's The
iFactory.[43][44] The Fame was released on August 19, 2008,[45] and reached
inumber one in Austria, Canada, Germany, Ireland, Switzerland and the UK, as
iwell as the top five in Australia and the US.[46][47] Its first two singles,
i"Just Dance" and "Poker Face",[48] reached number one in the United
iStates,[49] Australia,[50] Canada[51] and the UK.[52] The latter was also the
iworld's best-selling single of 2009, with 9.8 million copies sold that year,
iand spent a record 83 weeks on Billboard magazine's Digital Songs
ichart.[53][54] Three other singles, "Eh, Eh (Nothing Else I Can Say)",
i"LoveGame" and "Paparazzi", were released from the album;[55] the lattermost
ireached number one in Germany.[56] Remixed versions of the singles from The
iFame, except "Eh, Eh (Nothing Else I Can Say)", were included on Hitmixes in
iAugust 2009.[57] At the 52nd Annual Grammy Awards, The Fame and "Poker Face"
iwon Best Dance/Electronica Album and Best Dance Recording, respectively.[58]
i
iFollowing her opening act on the Pussycat Dolls' 2009 Doll Domination Tour in
iEurope and Oceania, Gaga headlined her worldwide The Fame Ball Tour, which
iran
ifrom March to September 2009.[60] While traveling the globe, she wrote eight
isongs for The Fame Monster, a reissue of The Fame.[61] Those new songs were
ialso released as a standalone EP on November 18, 2009.[62] Its first single,
i"Bad Romance", was released one month earlier[63] and went number one in
iCanada[51] and the UK,[52] and number two in the US,[49] Australia[64] and
iNew
iZealand.[65] "Telephone", with Beyoncé, followed as the second single from
ithe
iEP and became Gaga's fourth UK number one.[66][67] Its third single was
i"Alejandro",[68] which reached number one in Finland[69] and attracted
icontroversy when its music video was deemed blasphemous by the Catholic
iLeague.[70] Both tracks reached the top five in the US.[49] The video for
i"Bad
iRomance" became the most watched on YouTube in April 2010, and that October,
iGaga became the first person with more than one billion combined
iviews.[71][72] At the 2010 MTV Video Music Awards, she won eight awards from
i13 nominations, including Video of the Year for "Bad Romance".[73] She was
ithe
imost nominated artist for a single year, and the first woman to receive two
inominations for Video of the Year at the same ceremony.[74] The Fame Monster
iwon the Grammy Award for Best Pop Vocal Album, and "Bad Romance" won Best
iFemale Pop Vocal Performance and Best Short Form Music Video at the 53rd
iAnnual Grammy Awards.[75]
i
iIn 2009, Gaga spent a record 150 weeks on the UK Singles Chart and became the
imost downloaded female act in a year in the US, with 11.1 million downloads
isold, earning an entry in the Guinness Book of World Records.[76][77]
iWorldwide, The Fame and The Fame Monster together have sold more than 15
imillion copies, and the latter was 2010's second best-selling
ialbum.[78][79][80] Its success allowed Gaga to start her second worldwide
iconcert tour, The Monster Ball Tour, and release The Remix, her final record
iwith Cherrytree Records[81] and among the best-selling remix albums of all
itime.[82][83] The Monster Ball Tour ran from November 2009 to May 2011 and
igrossed $227.4 million, making it the highest-grossing concert tour for a
idebut headlining artist.[59][84] Concerts performed at Madison Square Garden
iin New York City were filmed for an HBO television special, Lady Gaga
iPresents
ithe Monster Ball Tour: At Madison Square Garden.[85] Gaga also performed
isongs
ifrom her albums at the 2009 Royal Variety Performance, the 52nd Annual Grammy
iAwards, and the 2010 Brit Awards.[86] Before Michael Jackson's death, Gaga
iwas
iset to take part in his canceled This Is It concert series at the O2 Arena in
ithe UK.[87]
i
iDuring this era, Gaga ventured into business, collaborating with consumer
ielectronics company Monster Cable Products to create in-ear, jewel-encrusted
iheadphones called Heartbeats by Lady Gaga.[88] She also partnered with
iPolaroid in January 2010 as their creative director and announced a suite of
iphoto-capture products called Grey Label.[89][90] Her collaboration with her
ipast record producer and ex-boyfriend Rob Fusari led to a lawsuit against her
iproduction team, Mermaid Music LLC.[a] At this time, Gaga was tested
iborderline positive for lupus, but claimed not to be affected by the symptoms
iand hoped to maintain a healthy lifestyle.[93][94]
i
iIn February 2011, Gaga released "Born This Way", the lead single from her
istudio album of the same name. The song sold more than one million copies
iwithin five days, earning the Guinness World Record for the fastest selling
isingle on iTunes.[95] It debuted atop the Billboard Hot 100, becoming the
i1,000th number-one single in the history of the charts.[96] Its second single
i"Judas" followed two months later,[97] and "The Edge of Glory" served as its
ithird single.[98] Both reached the top 10 in the US and the UK.[49][52] Her
imusic video for "The Edge of Glory", unlike her previous work, portrays her
idancing on a fire escape and walking on a lonely street, without intricate
ichoreography and back-up dancers.[99]
i
iBorn This Way was released on May 23, 2011,[97] and debuted atop the
iBillboard 200 with first-week sales of 1.1 million copies.[100] The album
isold
ieight million copies worldwide and received three Grammy nominations,
iincluding Gaga's third consecutive nomination for Album of the
iYear.[101][102]
iRolling Stone listed it among "The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time" in
i2020.[103] Born This Way's following singles were "You and I" and "Marry the
iNight",[104] which reached numbers six and 29 in the US, respectively.[49]
iWhile filming the former's music video, Gaga met and started dating actor
iTaylor Kinney in July 2011, who played her love interest.[105][106] She also
iembarked on the Born This Way Ball tour in April 2012, which was scheduled to
iconclude the following March, but ended one month earlier when Gaga canceled
ithe remaining dates due to a labral tear of her right hip that required
isurgery.[107] While refunds for the cancellations were estimated to be worth
i$25 million,[108] the tour grossed $183.9 million globally.[109]
i
iIn 2011, Gaga also worked with Tony Bennett on a jazz version of "The Lady Is
ia Tramp",[110] with Elton John on "Hello Hello" for the animated feature film
iGnomeo & Juliet,[111] and with The Lonely Island and Justin Timberlake on
i"3-Way (The Golden Rule)".[112] She also performed a concert at the Sydney
iTown Hall in Australia that year to promote Born This Way and to celebrate
iformer US President Bill Clinton's 65th birthday.[113] In November, she was
ifeatured in a Thanksgiving television special titled A Very Gaga
iThanksgiving,
iwhich attracted 5.7 million American viewers and spawned the release of her
ifourth EP, A Very Gaga Holiday.[114] In 2012, Gaga guest-starred as an
ianimated version of herself in an episode of The Simpsons called "Lisa Goes
iGaga",[115] and released her first fragrance, Lady Gaga Fame, followed by a
isecond one, Eau de Gaga, in 2014.[b]
i
iGaga began work on her third studio album, Artpop, in early 2012, during the
iBorn This Way Ball tour; she crafted the album to mirror "a night at the
iclub".[118][119][120] In August 2013, Gaga released the album's lead single
i"Applause",[121] which reached number one in Hungary, number four in the US,
iand number five in the UK.[52][49][122] A lyric video for Artpop track "Aura"
ifollowed in October to accompany Robert Rodriguez's Machete Kills, where she
iplays an assassin named La Chameleon.[123] The film received generally mixed
ireviews and earned less than half of its $33 million budget.[124][125] The
isecond Artpop single, "Do What U Want", featured singer R. Kelly and was
ireleased later that month,[126] topping the charts in Hungary and reaching
inumber 13 in the US.[49][127] Artpop was released on November 6, 2013, to
imixed reviews.[128] Helen Brown in The Daily Telegraph criticized Gaga for
imaking another album about her fame and doubted the record's originality, but
ifound it "great for dancing".[129] The album debuted atop the Billboard 200
ichart, and sold more than 2.5 million copies worldwide as of July
i2014.[130][131] "G.U.Y." was released as the third single in March 2014 and
ipeaked at number 76 in the US.[49][132]
i
iGaga hosted an episode of Saturday Night Live in November 2013.[134] After
iholding her second Thanksgiving Day television special on ABC, Lady Gaga and
ithe Muppets Holiday Spectacular, she performed a special rendition of "Do
iWhat
iU Want" with Christina Aguilera on the fifth season of the American reality
italent show The Voice.[135][136] In March 2014, Gaga had a seven-day concert
iresidency commemorating the last performance at New York's Roseland Ballroom
ibefore its closure.[137] Two months later, she embarked on the ArtRave: The
iArtpop Ball tour, building on concepts from her ArtRave promotional event.
iEarning $83 million, the tour included cities canceled from the Born This Way
iBall tour itinerary.[138] In the meantime, Gaga split from longtime manager
iTroy Carter over "creative differences",[139] and by June 2014, she and new
imanager Bobby Campbell joined Artist Nation, the artist management division
iof
iLive Nation Entertainment.[140] She briefly appeared in Rodriguez's Sin City:
iA Dame to Kill For, and was confirmed as Versace's spring-summer 2014
iambassador with a campaign called "Lady Gaga For Versace".[141][142]
i
iIn September 2014, Gaga released a collaborative jazz album with Tony Bennett
ititled Cheek to Cheek. The inspiration behind the album came from her
ifriendship with Bennett, and fascination with jazz music since her
ichildhood.[143] Before the album was released, it produced the singles
i"Anything Goes" and "I Can't Give You Anything but Love".[144] Cheek to Cheek
ireceived generally favorable reviews;[145] The Guardian's Caroline Sullivan
ipraised Gaga's vocals and Howard Reich of the Chicago Tribune wrote that
i"Cheek to Cheek serves up the real thing, start to finish".[146][147] The
irecord was Gaga's third consecutive number-one album on the Billboard
i200,[148] and won a Grammy Award for Best Traditional Pop Vocal Album.[149]
iThe duo recorded the concert special Tony Bennett and Lady Gaga: Cheek to
iCheek Live!,[150] and embarked on the Cheek to Cheek Tour from December 2014
ito August 2015.[151]
i
iIn February 2015, Gaga became engaged to Taylor Kinney.[152] After the
ilukewarm response to Artpop, Gaga began to reinvent her image and style.
iAccording to Billboard, this shift started with the release of Cheek to Cheek
iand the attention she received for her performance at the 87th Academy
iAwards,
iwhere she sang a medley of songs from The Sound of Music in a tribute to
iJulie
iAndrews.[133] Considered one of her best performances by Billboard, it
itriggered more than 214,000 interactions per minute globally on
iFacebook.[153][154] She and Diane Warren co-wrote the song "Til It Happens to
iYou" for the documentary The Hunting Ground, which earned them the Satellite
iAward for Best Original Song and an Academy Award nomination in the same
icategory.[155] Gaga won Billboard Woman of the Year and Contemporary Icon
iAward at the 2015 Annual Songwriters Hall of Fame Awards.[156][157]
i
iGaga had spent much of her early life wanting to be an actress, and achieved
iher goal when she starred in American Horror Story: Hotel.[158] Running from
iOctober 2015 to January 2016, Hotel is the fifth season of the television
ianthology horror series, American Horror Story, in which Gaga played a hotel
iowner named Elizabeth.[159][160] At the 73rd Golden Globe Awards, Gaga
ireceived the Best Actress in a Miniseries or Television Film award for her
iwork on the season.[158] She appeared in Nick Knight's 2015 fashion film for
iTom Ford's 2016 spring campaign[161] and was guest editor for V fashion
imagazine's 99th issue in January 2016, which featured 16 different
icovers.[162] She received Editor of the Year award at the Fashion Los Angeles
iAwards.[163]
i
iIn February 2016, Gaga sang the US national anthem at Super Bowl 50,[164]
ipartnered with Intel and Nile Rodgers for a tribute performance to the late
iDavid Bowie at the 58th Annual Grammy Awards,[165] and sang "Til It Happens
ito
iYou" at the 88th Academy Awards, where she was introduced by Joe Biden and
iwas
iaccompanied on-stage by 50 people who had suffered from sexual assault.[166]
iShe was honored that April with the Artist Award at the Jane Ortner Education
iAwards by The Grammy Museum, which recognizes artists who have demonstrated
ipassion and dedication to education through the arts.[167] Her engagement to
iTaylor Kinney ended in July; she later said her career had interfered with
itheir relationship.[168]
i
iGaga played a witch named Scathach in American Horror Story: Roanoke, the
iseries' sixth season,[169] which ran from September to November
i2016.[170][171] Her role in the fifth season of the show ultimately
iinfluenced
iher future music, prompting her to feature "the art of darkness".[172] In
iSeptember 2016, she released her fifth album's lead single, "Perfect
iIllusion", which topped the charts in France and reached number 15 in the
iUS.[173][174][175] The album, titled Joanne, was named after Gaga's late
iaunt,
iwho was an inspiration for the music.[176] It was released on October 21,
i2016, and became Gaga's fourth number one album on the Billboard 200, making
iher the first woman to reach the US chart's summit four times in the
i2010s.[177] The album's second single, "Million Reasons", followed the next
imonth and reached number four in the US.[175][178] She later released a piano
iversion of the album's title track in 2018,[179] which won a Grammy for Best
iPop Solo Performance.[180] To promote the album, Gaga embarked on the
ithree-date Dive Bar Tour.[181]
i
iGaga performed as the headlining act during the Super Bowl LI halftime show
ion February 5, 2017. Her performance featured a group of hundreds of lighted
idrones forming various shapes in the sky above Houston's NRG Stadium—the
ifirst
itime robotic aircraft appeared in a Super Bowl program.[182] It attracted
i117.5 million viewers in the United States, exceeding the game's 111.3
imillion
iviewers and making it the second most-watched Super Bowl halftime show to
idate.[183] The performance led to a surge of 410,000 song downloads in the
iUnited States for Gaga and earned her an Emmy nomination in the Outstanding
iSpecial Class Program category.[184][185] CBS Sports included her performance
ias the second best in the history of Super Bowl halftime shows.[186] In
iApril,
iGaga headlined the Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival.[187] She also
ireleased a standalone single, "The Cure", which reached the top 10 in
iAustralia.[188][189] Four months later, Gaga began the Joanne World Tour,
iwhich she announced after the Super Bowl LI halftime show.[190] Gaga's
icreation of Joanne and preparation for her halftime show performance were
ifeatured in the documentary Gaga: Five Foot Two, which premiered on Netflix
ithat September.[191] Throughout the film, she was seen suffering from chronic
ipain, which was later revealed to be the effect of a long-term condition
icalled fibromyalgia.[192] In February 2018, it prompted Gaga to cancel the
ilast ten shows of the Joanne World Tour, which ultimately grossed $95 million
ifrom 842,000 tickets sold.[193][194]
i
iIn March 2018, Gaga supported the March for Our Lives gun-control rally in
iWashington, D.C.,[196] and released a cover of Elton John's "Your Song" for
ihis tribute album Revamp.[197] Later that year, she starred as struggling
isinger Ally in Bradley Cooper's musical romantic drama A Star Is Born, a
iremake of the 1937 film of the same name. The film follows Ally's
irelationship
iwith singer Jackson Maine (played by Cooper), which becomes strained after
iher
icareer begins to overshadow his. It received acclaim from critics, with a
iconsensus that the movie had "appealing leads, deft direction, and an
iaffecting love story".[198] Cooper approached Gaga after seeing her perform
iat
ia cancer research fundraiser. An admirer of Cooper's work, Gaga agreed to the
iproject due to its portrayal of addiction and depression.[199][200] A Star Is
iBorn premiered at the 2018 Venice Film Festival, and was released worldwide
ithat October.[201] Gaga's performance was acclaimed by film critics, with
iPeter Bradshaw of The Guardian labeling the film "outrageously watchable" and
istating that "Gaga's ability to be part ordinary person, part
iextraterrestrial
icelebrity empress functions at the highest level";[202] Stephanie Zacharek of
iTime magazine similarly highlighted her "knockout performance" and found her
ito be "charismatic" without her usual makeup, wigs and costumes.[203] For the
irole, Gaga won the National Board of Review and Critics' Choice awards for
iBest Actress, in addition to receiving nominations for the Academy Award,
iGolden Globe Award, Screen Actors Guild Award and BAFTA Award for Best
iActress.[204]
i
iGaga and Cooper co-wrote and produced most of the songs on the soundtrack for
iA Star Is Born, which she insisted they perform live in the film.[205] Its
ilead single, "Shallow", performed by the two, was released on September 27,
i2018[206] and topped the charts in various countries including Australia, the
iUK and the US.[207] The soundtrack contains 34 tracks, including 17 original
isongs, and received generally positive reviews;[208] Mark Kennedy of The
iWashington Post called it a "five-star marvel" and Ben Beaumont-Thomas of The
iGuardian termed it an "instant classics full of Gaga's emotional
imight".[209][210] Commercially, the soundtrack debuted at number one in the
iUS, making Gaga the first woman with five US number-one albums in the 2010s,
iand breaking her tie with Taylor Swift as the most for any female artist this
idecade;[211] Swift tied with her again in 2019.[212] It additionally topped
ithe charts in Australia, Canada, Ireland, New Zealand, Switzerland and the
iUK.[213] As of June 2019, the soundtrack had sold over six million copies
iworldwide.[214] The album won Gaga four Grammy Awards—Best Compilation
iSoundtrack for Visual Media and Best Pop Duo/Group Performance and Best Song
iWritten for Visual Media for "Shallow", as well as the latter category for
i"I'll Never Love Again"—and a BAFTA Award for Best Film Music.[180][215][216]
i"Shallow" also won her the Academy Award, Golden Globe Award, Critics' Choice
iAward, and Satellite Award for Best Original Song.[204] Gaga gave live
iperformances of the song at the 61st Annual Grammy Awards and the 91st
iAcademy
iAwards.[217][218]
i
iIn October, Gaga announced her engagement to talent agent Christian Carino
iwhom she had met in early 2017.[219] They ended the engagement in February
i2019.[220] Gaga signed a concert residency, named Lady Gaga Enigma + Jazz &
iPiano, to perform at the MGM Park Theater in Las Vegas.[221] The residency
iconsists of two types of shows: Enigma, which focused on theatricality and
iincluded Gaga's biggest hits,[222] and Jazz & Piano, which involved tracks
ifrom the Great American Songbook and stripped-down versions of Gaga's songs.
iThe Enigma show opened in December 2018 and the Jazz & Piano in January
i2019.[223] Gaga launched her vegan makeup line, Haus Laboratories, in
iSeptember 2019 exclusively on Amazon. Consisting of 40 products, including
iliquid eyeliners, lip glosses and face mask sticker, it reached number-one on
iAmazon's list of best-selling lipsticks.[224]
i
iIn February 2020, Gaga began a relationship with entrepreneur Michael
iPolansky.[225] Her sixth studio album, Chromatica, was released on May 29,
i2020, to positive reviews.[226][227] It debuted atop the US charts, becoming
iher sixth consecutive number-one album in the country, and reached the top
ispot in more than a dozen other territories including Australia, Canada,
iFrance, Italy and the UK.[228] Chromatica was preceded by two singles,
i"Stupid
iLove", on February 28, 2020,[229] and "Rain on Me", with Ariana Grande, on
iMay
i22.[230] The latter won the Best Pop Duo/Group Performance at the 63rd Annual
iGrammy Awards, and debuted at number one in the US, making Gaga the third
iperson to top the country's chart in the 2000s, 2010s and 2020s.[231][232] At
ithe 2020 MTV Video Music Awards, Gaga won five awards, including the
iinaugural
iTricon Award recognizing artists accomplished in different areas of the
ientertainment industry.[233] In September 2020, she appeared in the video
icampaign for Valentino's Voce Viva fragrance, singing a stripped-down version
iof Chromatica track "Sine from Above", along with a group of models.[234]
i
iDuring the inauguration of Joe Biden as the 46th President of the United
iStates on January 20, 2021, Gaga sang the US national anthem.[236] In
iFebruary
i2021, her dog walker Ryan Fischer was hospitalized after getting shot in
iHollywood. Two of her French Bulldogs, Koji and Gustav, were taken while a
ithird dog named Miss Asia escaped and was subsequently recovered by police.
iGaga later offered a $500,000 reward for the return of her pets.[237][238]
iTwo
idays later, on February 26, a woman brought the dogs to a police station in
iLos Angeles. Both were unharmed. Los Angeles Police initially said the woman
iwho dropped off the dogs did not appear to be involved with the
ishooting,[239]
ibut on April 29, she was one of five people charged in connection with the
ishooting and theft.[240] In December 2022, James Howard Jackson, the man who
ishot Fischer, was sentenced to 21 years in prison.[241]
i
iIn April 2021, Gaga teamed up with Champagne brand Dom Pérignon, and appeared
iin an ad shot by Nick Knight.[242] On September 3, she released her third
iremix album, Dawn of Chromatica.[243] This was followed by her second
icollaborative album with Tony Bennett, titled Love for Sale, on September
i30.[244] The record received generally favorable reviews, and debuted at
inumber eight in the US.[245][246] The album's promotional rollout included
ithe
itelevision special One Last Time: An Evening with Tony Bennett and Lady Gaga,
ireleased in November 2021, on CBS, which featured select performances from
ithe
iduo's August 3 and 5 performances at Radio City Music Hall.[247][248] Another
itaped performance by the duo recorded for MTV Unplugged was released that
iDecember.[249] At the 64th Annual Grammy Awards, Love for Sale won Gaga and
iBennett the award for Best Traditional Pop Vocal Album.[250]
i
iAfter an appearance in the television special Friends: The Reunion, in which
iGaga sang "Smelly Cat" with Lisa Kudrow,[251] she portrayed Patrizia
iReggiani,
iwho was convicted of hiring a hitman to murder her ex-husband and former head
iof the Gucci fashion house Maurizio Gucci (played by Adam Driver), in Ridley
iScott's biographical crime film titled House of Gucci.[252][253] For the
ipart,
iGaga learned to speak with an Italian accent. She also stayed in character
ifor
i18 months, speaking with an accent for nine months during that period.[254]
iHer method acting approach took a toll on her mental wellbeing, and towards
ithe end of filming she had to be accompanied on-set by a psychiatric
inurse.[255] The film was released on November 24, 2021, to mixed reviews,
ithough critics praised Gaga's performance as "note-perfect".[256] She earned
ithe New York Film Critics Circle Award, and nominations for the BAFTA Award,
iCritics' Choice Award, Golden Globe Award and Screen Actors Guild Award for
iBest Actress.[257] Gaga co-wrote the song "Hold My Hand" for the 2022 film
iTop
iGun: Maverick,[258] and also composed the score alongside Hans Zimmer and
iHarold Faltermeyer.[259] She performed "Hold My Hand" live at the 95th
iAcademy
iAwards, where it was nominated for Best Original Song.[260] The track also
iearned Gaga her third win for Best Original Song at the Satellite
iAwards.[261]
iIn July 2022, she embarked on The Chromatica Ball stadium tour,[262] which
ihad
itwenty dates and grossed $112.4 million from 834,000 tickets sold.[235] By
ithe
iend of the year, she became the highest grossing female artist touring in
i2022.[263] In April 2023, Gaga was appointed as co-chair of the President's
iCommittee on the Arts and Humanities by President Joe Biden.[264] Gaga is set
ito star with Joaquin Phoenix in Joker: Folie à Deux, which will be released
iin
i2024.[265]
i
i===== Artistry =====
i
iGaga grew up listening to artists such as Michael Jackson,[266] the Beatles,
iStevie Wonder, Queen, Bruce Springsteen, Pink Floyd, Led Zeppelin, Whitney
iHouston,[267] Elton John, Prince,[268][269] En Vogue, TLC,[270] Christina
iAguilera,[271] Janet Jackson,[272] and Blondie,[273] who have all influenced
iher music.[274] Gaga's musical inspiration varies from dance-pop singers such
ias Madonna and Michael Jackson to glam rock artists such as David Bowie and
iFreddie Mercury, as well as the theatrics of the pop artist Andy Warhol and
iher own performance roots in musical theater.[31][275] She has been compared
ito Madonna, who has said that she sees herself reflected in Gaga.[276] Gaga
isays that she wants to revolutionize pop music as Madonna has.[277] Gaga has
ialso cited heavy metal bands as an influence, specifically Iron Maiden, Black
iSabbath and Marilyn Manson.[278][279][280][281] She credits Beyoncé as a key
iinspiration to pursue a musical career.[282]
i
iGaga was inspired by her mother to be interested in fashion, which she now
isays is a major influence and integrated with her music.[18][283]
iStylistically, Gaga has been compared to Leigh Bowery, Isabella Blow, and
iCher;[284][285] she once commented that as a child, she absorbed Cher's
ifashion sense and made it her own.[285] Gaga became friends with British
ifashion designer Alexander McQueen shortly before his suicide in 2010, and
ibecame known for wearing his designs, particularly his towering armadillo
ishoes.[93][286] She considers fashion designer Donatella Versace her muse;
iVersace has called Lady Gaga "the fresh Donatella".[287][288] Gaga has also
ibeen influenced by Princess Diana, whom she has admired since her
ichildhood.[289]
i
iGaga has called the Indian alternative medicine advocate Deepak Chopra a
i"true inspiration",[290] and has also quoted Indian leader Osho's book
iCreativity on Twitter. Gaga says she was influenced by Osho's work in valuing
irebellion through creativity and equality.[291]
i
iCritics have analyzed and scrutinized Gaga's musical and performance style,
ias she has experimented with new ideas and images throughout her career. She
isays the continual reinvention is "liberating" herself, which she has been
idrawn to since childhood.[292] Gaga combines a variety of music genres,
iparticularly incorporating elements of rock into her pop and dance music. She
ihas also branched out into jazz and other non-pop musical genres.[293] Gaga
iis
ia contralto, with a range spanning from B♭2 to B5.[294][295][296] She has
ichanged her vocal style regularly, and considers Born This Way "much more
ivocally up to par with what I've always been capable of".[297][298] In
isumming
iup her voice, Entertainment Weekly wrote: "There's an immense emotional
iintelligence behind the way she uses her voice. Almost never does she
ioverwhelm a song with her vocal ability, recognizing instead that artistry is
ito be found in nuance rather than lung power."[299]
i
iAccording to Evan Sawdey of PopMatters, Gaga "manage[s] to get you moving and
igrooving at an almost effortless pace".[300] Gaga believes that "all good
imusic can be played on a piano and still sound like a hit".[301] Simon
iReynolds wrote in 2010, "Everything about Gaga came from electroclash, except
ithe music, which wasn't particularly 1980s, just ruthlessly catchy naughties
ipop glazed with Auto-Tune and undergirded with R&B-ish beats."[302]
i
iGaga's songs have covered a wide variety of concepts; The Fame discusses the
ilust for stardom, while the follow-up The Fame Monster expresses fame's dark
iside through monster metaphors. The Fame is an electropop and dance-pop album
ithat has influences of 1980s pop and 1990s Europop,[303] whereas The Fame
iMonster displays Gaga's taste for pastiche, drawing on "Seventies arena glam,
iperky ABBA disco, and sugary throwbacks like Stacey Q".[304] Born This Way
ihas
ilyrics in English, French, German, and Spanish and features themes common to
iGaga's controversial songwriting such as sex, love, religion, money, drugs,
iidentity, liberation, sexuality, freedom, and individualism.[305] The album
iexplores new genres, such as electronic rock and techno.[306]
i
iThe themes in Artpop revolve around Gaga's personal views of fame, love, sex,
ifeminism, self-empowerment, overcoming addiction, and reactions to media
iscrutiny.[307] Billboard describes Artpop as "coherently channeling R&B,
itechno, disco and rock music".[308] With Cheek to Cheek, Gaga dabbled in the
ijazz genre.[309] Joanne, exploring the genres of country, funk, pop, dance,
irock, electronic music and folk, was influenced by her personal life.[310]
iThe
iA Star Is Born soundtrack contains elements of blues rock, country and
ibubblegum pop.[209] Billboard says its lyrics are about wanting change, its
istruggle, love, romance, and bonding, describing the music as "timeless,
iemotional, gritty and earnest. They sound like songs written by artists who,
iquite frankly, are supremely messed up but hit to the core of the
ilistener."[311] On Chromatica, Gaga returned to her dance-pop roots, and
idiscussed her struggles with mental health.[312] Her second album with Tony
iBennett, Love for Sale, consists of a tribute to Cole Porter.[313]
i
iFeaturing constant costume changes and provocative visuals, Gaga's music
ivideos are often described as short films.[314] The video for "Telephone"
iearned Gaga the Guinness World Record for Most Product Placement in a
iVideo.[315] According to author Curtis Fogel, she explores bondage and
isadomasochism and highlights prevalent feminist themes. The main themes of
iher
imusic videos are sex, violence, and power. She calls herself "a little bit of
ia feminist" and asserts that she is "sexually empowering women".[316]
iBillboard ranked her sixth on its list of "The 100 Greatest Music Video
iArtists of All Time" in 2020, stating that "the name 'Lady Gaga' will forever
ibe synonymous with culture-shifting music videos".[317]
i
iRegarded as "one of the greatest living musical performers" by Rolling
iStone,[318] Gaga has called herself a perfectionist when it comes to her
ielaborate shows.[319] Her performances have been described as "highly
ientertaining and innovative";[320] the blood-spurting performance of
i"Paparazzi" at the 2009 MTV Video Music Awards was described as "eye-popping"
iby MTV News.[321] She continued the blood-soaked theme during The Monster
iBall
iTour, causing protests in England from family groups and fans in the
iaftermath
iof the Cumbria shootings, in which a taxi driver had killed 12 people, then
ihimself.[322] At the 2011 MTV Video Music Awards, Gaga appeared in drag as
iher
imale alter ego, Jo Calderone, and delivered a lovesick monologue before a
iperformance of her song "You and I".[323] As Gaga's choreographer and
icreative
idirector, Laurieann Gibson provided material for her shows and videos for
ifour
iyears before she was replaced by her assistant Richard Jackson in 2014.[324]
i
iIn an October 2018 article for Billboard, Rebecca Schiller traced back Gaga's
ivideography from "Just Dance" to the release of A Star Is Born. Schiller
inoted
ithat following the Artpop era, Gaga's stripped-down approach to music was
ireflected in the clips for the singles from Joanne, taking the example of the
imusic video of lead single "Perfect Illusion" where she eschewed "the
ielaborate outfits for shorts and a tee-shirt as she performed the song at a
idesert party". It continued with her performances in the film as well as her
istage persona.[325] Reviewing The Chromatica Ball in 2022, Chris Willman of
iVariety wrote that Gaga "could have further played the authenticity card for
iall it's worth" after the release of Joanne and A Star Is Born, but instead
i"has determined to keep herself weird — or just weird enough to provide
inecessarily ballast to her more earnest inclinations".[326]
i
i===== Public image =====
i
iPublic reception of her music, fashion sense, and persona is polarized.
iBecause of her influence on modern culture, and her rise to global fame,
isociologist Mathieu Deflem of the University of South Carolina has offered a
icourse titled "Lady Gaga and the Sociology of the Fame" since early 2011 with
ithe objective of unraveling "some of the sociologically relevant dimensions
iof
ithe fame of Lady Gaga".[328] When Gaga met briefly with then-president Barack
iObama at a Human Rights Campaign fundraiser, he found the interaction
i"intimidating" as she was dressed in 16-inch heels, making her the tallest
iwoman in the room.[329] When interviewed by Barbara Walters for her annual
iABC
iNews special 10 Most Fascinating People in 2009, Gaga dismissed the claim
ithat
ishe is intersex as an urban legend. Responding to a question on this issue,
ishe expressed her fondness for androgyny.[330]
i
iGaga's outlandish fashion sense has also served as an important aspect of her
icharacter.[284][287] During her early career, members of the media compared
iher fashion choices to those of Christina Aguilera.[287] In 2011, 121 women
igathered at the Grammy Awards dressed in costumes similar to those worn by
iGaga, earning the 2011 Guinness World Record for Largest Gathering of Lady
iGaga Impersonators.[95] The Global Language Monitor named "Lady Gaga" as the
iTop Fashion Buzzword with her trademark "no pants" a close third.[331]
iEntertainment Weekly put her outfits on its end of the decade "best-of" list,
isaying that she "brought performance art into the mainstream".[332] People
iranked her number one on their "Best Dressed Stars of 2021" list, writing
ithat
iGaga "strutted the streets in high-fashion designs, from a sculptural
iseersucker number to a black lace corseted gown—accessorizing each with
ielegant updos, sky-high heels and retro shades—like it was no sweat."[333]
i
iTime placed Gaga on their All-Time 100 Fashion Icons list, stating: "Lady
iGaga is just as notorious for her outrageous style as she is for her pop hits
i... [Gaga] has sported outfits made from plastic bubbles, Kermit the Frog
idolls, and raw meat."[334] Gaga wore a dress made of raw beef to the 2010 MTV
iVideo Music Awards, which was supplemented by boots, a purse, and a hat also
imade out of raw beef.[335] Partly awarded in recognition of the dress, Vogue
inamed her one of the Best Dressed people of 2010 and Time named the dress the
iFashion Statement of the year.[336][337] It attracted the attention of
iworldwide media; the animal rights organization PETA found it offensive.[338]
iThe meat dress was displayed at the National Museum of Women in the Arts in
i2012,[339] and entered the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in September 2015.[340]
i
iGaga's fans call her "Mother Monster", and she often refers to them as
i"Little Monsters", a phrase she had tattooed on herself in dedication.[341]
iIn
ihis article "Lady Gaga Pioneered Online Fandom Culture As We Know It" for
iVice, Jake Hall wrote that Gaga inspired several subsequent fan-brandings,
isuch as those of Taylor Swift, Rihanna and Justin Bieber.[342] In July 2012,
iGaga also co-founded the social networking service LittleMonsters.com,
idevoted
ito her fans.[343] Scott Hardy, CEO of Polaroid, praised Gaga for inspiring
ifans and for her close interactions with them on social media.[344]
i
iIn 2011, the Ministry of Culture of the People's Republic of China acting on
ibehalf of the State Administration of Radio, Film and Television, banned Gaga
ifor "being vulgar."[345] The ban was lifted in 2014. However, conditions for
iArtpop to go on sale legally in China were placed on the album artwork,
icovering her almost naked body. Officials also changed the title of the song
i"Sexxx Dreams" to "X Dreams."[346]
i
iIn 2016, Gaga was banned in China again after she publicly talked with the
iDalai Lama.[347][348] The Chinese government added Gaga to a list of hostile
iforeign forces, and Chinese websites and media organizations were ordered to
istop distributing her songs. The Publicity Department of the Chinese
iCommunist
iParty also issued an order for state-controlled media to condemn this
imeeting.[349] In the following years, Gaga's image was blacked out in
ireporting of the 91st Academy Awards in China and her appearance was cut from
iFriends: The Reunion; both incidents received backlash from her Chinese
ifans.[350][351]
i
i===== Activism =====
i
iAfter declining an invitation to appear on the single "We Are the World 25
ifor Haiti", because of rehearsals for her tour, to benefit victims of the
i2010
iHaiti earthquake, Gaga donated the proceeds of her January 2010 Radio City
iMusic Hall concert to the country's reconstruction relief fund.[352] All
iprofits from her online store that day were also donated, and Gaga announced
ithat $500,000 was collected for the fund.[353] Hours after the 2011 Tōhoku
iearthquake and tsunami hit Japan, Gaga tweeted a link to Japan Prayer
iBracelets. All revenue from a bracelet she designed in conjunction with the
icompany was donated to relief efforts;[354] these raised $1.5 million.[355]
iIn
iJune 2011, Gaga performed at MTV Japan's charity show in Makuhari Messe,
iwhich
ibenefited the Japanese Red Cross.[356]
i
iIn 2012, Gaga joined the campaign group Artists Against Fracking.[357] That
iOctober, Yoko Ono gave Gaga and four other activists the LennonOno Grant for
iPeace in Reykjavík, Iceland.[358] The following month, Gaga pledged to donate
i$1 million to the American Red Cross to help the victims of Hurricane Sandy.
iGaga also contributes in the fight against HIV and AIDS, focusing on
ieducating
iyoung women about the risks of the disease. In collaboration with Cyndi
iLauper, Gaga joined forces with MAC Cosmetics to launch a line of lipstick
iunder their supplementary cosmetic line, Viva Glam.[359] Sales have raised
imore than $202 million to fight HIV and AIDS.[360]
i
iIn April 2016, Gaga joined Vice President Joe Biden at the University of
iNevada, Las Vegas to support Biden's It's On Us campaign as he traveled to
icolleges on behalf of the organization, which has seen 250,000 students from
imore than 530 colleges sign a pledge of solidarity and activism.[361] Two
imonths later, Gaga attended the 84th Annual US Conference of Mayors in
iIndianapolis where she joined with the Dalai Lama to talk about the power of
ikindness and how to make the world a more compassionate place.[362]
i
iIn April 2020, Gaga curated the televised benefit concert, One World:
iTogether at Home, a collaboration with Global Citizen to benefit the World
iHealth Organization's COVID-19 Solidarity Response Fund.[363][364] The
ispecial
iraised $127 million, which according to Forbes "puts it on par with the other
ilegendary fundraiser, Live Aid, as the highest grossing charity concert in
ihistory."[365] In recognition of her contribution to the Black Lives Matter
imovement, Gaga received the Yolanda Denise King High Ground Award from the
iKing Center's Beloved Community Awards in January 2021. In her acceptance
ispeech, she denounced racism and white supremacy and addressed her social
iresponsibility as a high-profile artist and white woman.[366]
i
iIn 2012, Gaga launched the Born This Way Foundation (BTWF), a non-profit
iorganization that focuses on youth empowerment. It takes its name from her
i2011 single and album. Media proprietor Oprah Winfrey, writer Deepak Chopra,
iand US Secretary of Health and Human Services Kathleen Sebelius spoke at the
ifoundation's inauguration at Harvard University.[367] The foundation's
ioriginal funding included $1.2 million from Gaga, $500,000 from the MacArthur
iFoundation, and $850,000 from Barneys New York.[368] In July 2012, the BTWF
ipartnered with Office Depot, which donated 25% of the sales, a minimum of $1
imillion of a series of limited edition back-to-school products.[369] The
ifoundation's initiatives have included the "Born Brave Bus" that followed her
ion tour as a youth drop-in center as an initiative against
ibullying.[370][371]
i
iIn October 2015, at the Yale Center for Emotional Intelligence, Gaga joined
i200 high school students, policy makers, and academic officials, including
iPeter Salovey, to discuss ways to recognize and channel emotions for positive
ioutcomes.[372] In 2016, the foundation partnered with Intel, Vox Media, and
iRecode to fight online harassment.[373] The sales revenue of the 99th issue
iof
ithe V magazine, which featured Gaga and Kinney, was donated to the
ifoundation.[162] Gaga and Elton John released the clothing and accessories
iline Love Bravery at Macy's in May. 25% of each purchase support Gaga's
ifoundation and the Elton John AIDS Foundation.[374] Gaga partnered with
iStarbucks for a week in June 2017 with the "Cups of Kindness" campaign, where
ithe company donated 25 cents from some of the beverages sold to the
ifoundation.[375] She also appeared in a video by Staples Inc. to raise funds
ifor the foundation and DonorsChoose.org.[376]
i
iOn the 2018 World Kindness Day, Gaga partnered with the foundation to bring
ifood and relief to a Red Cross shelter for people who have been forced to
ievacuate homes due to the California wildfires. The foundation also partnered
iwith Starbucks and SoulCycle to thank California firefighters for their
irelief
iwork during the crisis. The singer had to previously evacuate her own home
iduring the Woolsey Fire which spread through parts of Malibu.[377]
i
iIn March 2019, she penned a letter to supporters of the Born This Way
iFoundation, announcing the launch of a new pilot program for a teen mental
ihealth first aid project with the National Council for Behavioral Health.
iGaga
irevealed her personal struggles with mental health in her letter and how she
iwas able to get support which saved her life: "I know what it means to have
isomeone support me and understand what I'm going through, and every young
iperson in the world should have someone to turn to when they're hurting. It
isaved my life, and it will save theirs."[378][379] In September 2020, Gaga
ireleased an anthology book, Channel Kindness: Stories of Kindness and
iCommunity, featuring fifty-one stories about kindness, bravery, and
iresilience
ifrom young people all over the world collected by the Born This Way
iFoundation, and introduced by herself.[380] She had been promoting it with a
i21 days of kindness challenge on her social media, using the "BeKind21"
ihashtag.[381] In 2021, Gaga collaborated with the Champagne house Dom
iPérignon
ito release a limited edition of Rosé Vintage 2005 bottles along with a
isculpture designed by her. The 110 exclusive pieces will be sold at private
isales, and the profits will benefit the foundation.[382] On the 2021 World
iKindness Day, Gaga released a 30-minute special, titled The Power of
iKindness,
ias part of the foundation's Channel Kindness program, in which together with
ia
imental health expert and a group of eleven young people, she explored the
iconnection between kindness and mental health.[383]
i
iA bisexual woman,[c] Gaga actively supports LGBT rights worldwide.[384] She
iattributes much of her early success as a mainstream artist to her gay fans
iand is considered a gay icon.[385][386] Early in her career, Gaga had
idifficulty getting radio airplay, and stated, "The turning point for me was
ithe gay community."[387] She thanked FlyLife, a Manhattan-based LGBT
imarketing
icompany with whom her label Interscope works, in the liner notes of The
iFame.[388] One of her first televised performances was in May 2008 at the
iNewNowNext Awards, an awards show aired by the LGBT television network
iLogo.[389]
i
iGaga spoke at the 2009 National Equality March in Washington, D.C. to support
ithe LGBT rights movement.[390] She attended the 2010 MTV Video Music Awards
iaccompanied by four gay and lesbian former members of the United States Armed
iForces who had been unable to serve openly under the US military's "don't
iask,
idon't tell" policy, which banned open homosexuality in the military.[391]
iGaga
iurged her fans via YouTube to contact their senators in an effort to overturn
ithe policy. In September 2010, she spoke at a Servicemembers Legal Defense
iNetwork's rally in Portland, Maine. Following this event, The Advocate named
iher a "fierce advocate" for gays and lesbians.[392]
i
iGaga appeared at Europride, an international event dedicated to LGBT pride,
iin Rome in June 2011. She criticized the poor state of gay rights in many
iEuropean countries and described gay people as "revolutionaries of
ilove".[393]
iLater that year, she was referenced by teenager Jamey Rodemeyer in the hours
iprior to his death, with Rodemeyer having tweeted "@ladygaga bye mother
imonster, thank you for all you have done, paws up forever". Rodemeyer's
isuicide prompted Gaga to meet with then-President Barack Obama in order to
iaddress anti-gay bullying in American schools.[394] In 2011, she was also
iordained as a minister by the Universal Life Church Monastery so that she
icould officiate the wedding of two female friends.[395]
i
iIn June 2016, during a vigil held in Los Angeles for victims of the attack at
ithe gay nightclub Pulse in Orlando, Gaga read aloud the names of the 49
ipeople
ikilled in the attack, and gave a speech.[396] Later that month, Gaga appeared
iin Human Rights Campaign's tribute video to the victims of the attack.[397]
iShe opposed the presidency of Donald Trump and his military transgender
iban.[398][399] She supported former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton for
ipresident in 2016.[400] In 2018, a leaked memo from Trump's office revealed
ithat his administration wanted to change the legal definition of sex to
iexclude transgender Americans. Gaga was one of the many celebrities to call
ihim out and spread the #WontBeErased campaign to her 77 million Twitter
ifollowers.[401][402] In January 2019, during one of her Enigma shows, she
icriticized Vice President Mike Pence for his wife Karen Pence working at an
ievangelical Christian school where LGBTQ people are turned away, calling him
i"the worst representation of what it means to be a Christian". Gaga also
istated "I am a Christian woman, and what I do know about Christianity is that
iwe bear no prejudice, and everybody is welcome".[403] Gaga made a
icongratulatory speech commemorating the 50th anniversary of the Stonewall
iriots and the LGBTQ+ community's accomplishments at WorldPride NYC 2019
ioutside the Stonewall Inn, birthplace of the modern gay rights movement.[404]
i
i===== Legacy =====
i
iGaga was named the "Queen of Pop" in a 2011 ranking by Rolling Stone based on
irecord sales and social media metrics. In 2012, she ranked fourth in VH1's
iGreatest Women in Music[405][406] and became a feature of the temporary
iexhibition The Elevated. From the Pharaoh to Lady Gaga, which marked the
i150th
ianniversary of the National Museum in Warsaw.[407]
i
iGaga has often been praised for using controversy to bring attention to
ivarious issues.[408][409] According to Frankie Graddon of The Independent,
iGaga—who wore a meat dress to highlight her distaste for the US military's
i"don't ask, don't tell" policy—influenced protest dressing on red
icarpet.[410]
iBillboard named her "the Greatest Pop Star of 2009", asserting that "to say
ithat her one-year rise from rookie to MVP was meteoric doesn't quite cut it,
ias she wasn't just successful, but game-changing—thanks to her voracious
iappetite for reinvention."[411] Because of The Fame's success—it was listed
ias
ione of the 100 Greatest Debut Albums of All-Time by Rolling Stone in
i2013[412]—Gaga has been credited as one of the musicians that popularized
isynth-pop in the late 2000s and early 2010s.[413]
i
iAccording to Kelefa Sanneh of The New Yorker, "Lady Gaga blazed a trail for
itruculent pop stars by treating her own celebrity as an evolving art
iproject."[414] Including Born This Way as one of the 50 best female albums of
iall time, Rolling Stone's Rob Sheffield considers it "hard to remember a
iworld
iwhere we didn't have Gaga, although we're pretty sure it was a lot more
iboring".[415] In 2015, Time also noted that Gaga had "practically invented
ithe
icurrent era of pop music as spectacle".[416] A 2017 journal published by
iPsychology of Aesthetics, Creativity, and the Arts studying structural
ipatterns in melodies of earworm songs compiled lists of catchiest tracks from
i3,000 participants, in which Gaga's "Bad Romance", "Alejandro", and "Poker
iFace" ranked number one, eight, and nine, respectively.[417] In 2018, NPR
inamed her the second most influential female artist of the 21st century,
inoting her as "one of the first big artists of the 'Internet age'".[418] Gaga
iand her work have influenced various artists including Miley Cyrus,[419]
iNicki
iMinaj,[420] Ellie Goulding,[421] Halsey,[422] Jennifer Lopez,[423]
iBeyoncé,[424] Nick Jonas,[425] Sam Smith,[426] Noah Cyrus,[427] Katherine
iLangford,[428] MGMT,[429] Allie X,[430] Greyson Chance,[431] Cardi B,[432]
iRina Sawayama,[433] Blackpink,[434] Madison Beer,[435] Ren,[436]
iSlayyyter,[437] Bebe Rexha,[438] Bree Runway,[439] Celeste,[440] Kim
iPetras,[441] Jojo Siwa,[442] Pabllo Vittar,[443] Ava Max,[444] Doja Cat,[445]
iChaeyoung of Twice,[446] Kanye West,[447] Rachel Zegler,[448] SZA,[449]
iRaye,[450] and Grace Gaustad.[451]
i
iA new genus of ferns, Gaga, and three species, G. germanotta, G. monstraparva
iand Kaikaia gaga, have been named in her honor. The name monstraparva alluded
ito Gaga's fans, known as Little Monsters, since their symbol is the
ioutstretched "monster claw" hand, which resembles a tightly rolled young fern
ileaf prior to unfurling.[452][453] Gaga also has an extinct mammal, Gagadon
iminimonstrum,[454] and a parasitic wasp, Aleiodes gaga, named for
iher.[455][456]
i
iIn Taichung, Taiwan, July 3 is designated as "Lady Gaga Day" marking the
ifirst day Gaga visited the country in 2011.[457] In May 2021, to celebrate
ithe
itenth anniversary of Born This Way and its cultural impact, West Hollywood
imayor, Lindsey P. Horvath, presented a key to the city to Gaga and declared
iMay 23 as "Born This Way Day." A street painting with the Daniel Quasar's
iversion of the pride flag featuring the album's title was also unveiled on
iRobertson Boulevard as a tribute to the album, and how it has inspired the
iLGBT community over the years.[458]
i
i===== Achievements =====
i
iGaga has won thirteen Grammy Awards,[459] an Academy Award,[204] two Golden
iGlobe Awards,[460] a BAFTA Award,[204] three Brit Awards,[461] sixteen
iGuinness World Records,[462] and the inaugural Songwriters Hall of Fame's
iContemporary Icon Award.[157] She received a National Arts Awards' Young
iArtist Award, which honors individuals who have shown accomplishments and
ileadership early in their career,[463] the Jane Ortner Artist Award from the
iGrammy Museum in 2016,[167] and a National Board of Review Award for Best
iActress in 2018.[204] Gaga has also been recognized by the Council of Fashion
iDesigners of America (CFDA) with the Fashion Icon award.[464] In 2019, she
ibecame the first woman to win an Academy Award, a BAFTA Award, a Golden Globe
iAward and a Grammy Award in one year for her contribution to A Star Is Born's
isoundtrack.[465] At the 2020 MTV Video Music Awards, she was honored with the
iinaugural Tricon Award representing achievement in three (or more) fields of
ientertainment.[233]
i
iAcknowledged by Billboard as the Greatest Pop Star in 2009, with honorable
imention in 2010 and 2011, and Woman of the Year in 2015, Gaga has
iconsecutively appeared on the magazine's Artists of the Year chart (scoring
ithe definitive title in 2010), and ranked 11th on its Top Artists of the
i2010s
ichart.[466][467][468] She is the longest-reigning act of Billboard's
iDance/Electronic Albums chart with 244 weeks at number one, while The Fame
i(2008) holds the record for the most time on top in the chart's history, with
i175 non-consecutive weeks.[469][470] Her album Born This Way (2011) featured
ion Rolling Stone's 2020 revision of their 500 Greatest Albums of All Time,
iand
ithe song "Bad Romance" and its music video were among Rolling Stone's 500
iGreatest Songs of All Time and 100 Greatest Music Videos of All Time,
irespectively, in 2021.[471] In 2023, the magazine included Gaga among the 200
iGreatest Singers of All Time.[472]
i
iWith estimated sales of 170 million records as of 2018,[473] Gaga is one of
ithe world's best-selling music artists, and has produced some of the
ibest-selling singles of all time.[474] As of 2022, she has grossed more than
i$689.5 million in revenue from concert tours and residencies with attendance
iof 6.3 million, being the fifth woman to pass the half-billion total as
ireported to Billboard Boxscore,[235][475] receiving the Pollstar Award for
iPop
iTouring Artist of the Decade (2010s).[476] She is the fourteenth top digital
isingles artist in the US, with 87.5 million equivalent units certified
iaccording to Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA),[d] was the
ifirst woman to receive the Digital Diamond Award certification from RIAA, one
iof the few artists with at least three Diamond certified songs ("Bad
iRomance",
i"Poker Face" and "Just Dance"),[478][479] and the first and only artist to
ihave two songs pass seven million downloads ("Poker Face" and "Just
iDance").[480] In 2020, she became the first female artist to have four
isingles
i("Just Dance", "Poker Face", "Bad Romance" and "Shallow") sell at least 10
imillion copies globally.[481]
i
iAccording to Guinness World Records, she was the most followed person on
iTwitter from 2011 to 2013,[482] the most famous celebrity in 2013,[483] and
ithe most powerful popstar in 2014.[484] She was included on Forbes' Celebrity
i100 from 2010 to 2015 and then from 2018 to 2020, having topped the list in
i2011. She earned $62 million, $90 million, $52 million, $80 million, $33
imillion, and $59 million from 2010 through 2015, and $50 million, $39 million
iand $38 million between 2018 and 2020.[485][486] Gaga also appeared on their
ilist of the World's Most Powerful Women from 2010 to 2014.[487][488] She was
inamed one of the 100 most influential people in the world by Time magazine in
i2010 and 2019,[489][490] and ranked second in its most influential people of
ithe past ten years readers' poll in 2013.[491]
i
iIn March 2012, Gaga was ranked fourth on Billboard's list of top moneymakers
iof 2011 with earnings of $25 million, which included sales from Born This Way
iand her Monster Ball Tour.[492] The following year, she topped Forbes' List
iof
iTop-Earning Celebs Under 30,[486] which she also topped in 2011,[493] and in
iFebruary 2016, the magazine estimated her net worth to be $275 million.[494]
iIn December 2019, Gaga placed 10th on Forbes' list of Top-Earning Musicians
iof
ithe Decade with earnings of $500 million in the 2010s. She was the fourth
ihighest-earning female musician on the list.[495]
i
i===== Discography =====
i
iSolo studio albums
i
iCollaborative studio albums
i
i===== Tours and residencies =====
i
iHeadlining tours
i
iCo-headlining tours
i
iResidencies
i
i===== Filmography =====
i
iFilm
i
iTelevision
i
i===== See also =====
i
i===== Notes =====
i
i===== References =====
i
i===== External links =====
i
i
i
i  ------------- SOURCE ----------------
i
iURL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lady_Gaga
i
iLICENSE: Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike
i
i=========================================
i
i
i$
Bt:Lady Gaga - Wikipedia	/x/w/g/https_58__47__47_en_46_wikipedia_46_org_47_wiki_47_Lady_95_Gaga	texopher.com	70
