i
1[?] Read Details	/x/w/gd/https_58__47__47_en_46_wikipedia_46_org_47_wiki_47_Argentina	texopher.com	70
i
i===== Contents =====
i
iArgentina (Spanish pronunciation: [aɾxenˈtina] (listen)), officially the
iArgentine Republic[A] (Spanish: República Argentina), is a country in the
isouthern half of South America. Argentina covers an area of 2,780,400 km2
i(1,073,500 sq mi),[B] making it the second-largest country in South America
iafter Brazil, the fourth-largest country in the Americas, and the
ieighth-largest country in the world. It shares the bulk of the Southern Cone
iwith Chile to the west, and is also bordered by Bolivia and Paraguay to the
inorth, Brazil to the northeast, Uruguay and the South Atlantic Ocean to the
ieast, and the Drake Passage to the south. Argentina is a federal state
isubdivided into twenty-three provinces, and one autonomous city, which is the
ifederal capital and largest city of the nation, Buenos Aires. The provinces
iand the capital have their own constitutions, but exist under a federal
isystem. Argentina claims sovereignty over the Falkland Islands, South Georgia
iand the South Sandwich Islands, and a part of Antarctica.
i
iThe earliest recorded human presence in modern-day Argentina dates back to
ithe Paleolithic period.[13] The Inca Empire expanded to the northwest of the
icountry in Pre-Columbian times. The country has its roots in Spanish
icolonization of the region during the 16th century.[14] Argentina rose as the
isuccessor state of the Viceroyalty of the Río de la Plata,[15] a Spanish
ioverseas viceroyalty founded in 1776. The declaration and fight for
iindependence (1810–1818) was followed by an extended civil war that lasted
iuntil 1861, culminating in the country's reorganization as a federation. The
icountry thereafter enjoyed relative peace and stability, with several waves
iof
iEuropean immigration, mainly Italians and Spaniards, influencing its culture
iand demography.[16][17][18][19]
i
iThe almost-unparalleled increase in prosperity led to Argentina becoming the
iseventh-wealthiest nation in the world by the early 20th century.[20][21][22]
iIn 1896, Argentina's GDP per capita surpassed that of the United States[23]
iand was consistently in the top ten before at least 1920.[24][25] Although it
iremained among the fifteen richest countries for several decades,[20]
ifollowing the Great Depression in the 1930s, Argentina descended into
ipolitical instability and economic decline that pushed it back into
iunderdevelopment,[26] being currently ranked 62nd in the world. Following the
ideath of President Juan Perón in 1974, his widow and vice president, Isabel
iPerón, ascended to the presidency, before being overthrown in 1976. The
ifollowing military junta, which was supported by the United States,
ipersecuted
iand murdered thousands of political critics, activists, and leftists in the
iDirty War, a period of state terrorism and civil unrest that lasted until the
ielection of Raúl Alfonsín as president in 1983.
i
iArgentina is a regional power, and retains its historic status as a middle
ipower in international affairs.[27][28][29] A major non-NATO ally of the
iUnited States,[30] Argentina is a developing country with the second-highest
iHDI (human development index) in Latin America after Chile.[31] It maintains
ithe second-largest economy in South America, and is a member of G-15 and G20.
iArgentina is also a founding member of the United Nations, World Bank, World
iTrade Organization, Mercosur, Community of Latin American and Caribbean
iStates
iand the Organization of Ibero-American States.
i
i===== Etymology =====
i
iThe description of the region by the word Argentina has been found on a
iVenetian map in 1536.[32]
i
iIn English, the name "Argentina" comes from the Spanish language; however,
ithe naming itself is not Spanish, but Italian. Argentina (masculine
iargentino)
imeans in Italian "(made) of silver, silver coloured", derived from the Latin
i"argentum" for silver. In Italian, the adjective or the proper noun is often
iused in an autonomous way as a substantive and replaces it and it is said
il'Argentina.
i
iThe name Argentina was probably first given by the Venetian and Genoese
inavigators, such as Giovanni Caboto. In Spanish and Portuguese, the words for
i"silver" are respectively plata and prata and "(made) of silver" is plateado
iand prateado. Argentina was first associated with the silver mountains
ilegend,
iwidespread among the first European explorers of the La Plata Basin.[33]
i
iThe first written use of the name in Spanish can be traced to La
iArgentina,[C] a 1602 poem by Martín del Barco Centenera describing the
iregion.[34] Although "Argentina" was already in common usage by the 18th
icentury, the country was formally named "Viceroyalty of the Río de la Plata"
iby the Spanish Empire, and "United Provinces of the Río de la Plata" after
iindependence.
i
iThe 1826 constitution included the first use of the name "Argentine Republic"
iin legal documents.[35] The name "Argentine Confederation" was also commonly
iused and was formalized in the Argentine Constitution of 1853.[36] In 1860 a
ipresidential decree settled the country's name as "Argentine Republic",[37]
iand that year's constitutional amendment ruled all the names since 1810 as
ilegally valid.[38][D]
i
iIn English, the country was traditionally called "the Argentine", mimicking
ithe typical Spanish usage la Argentina[39] and perhaps resulting from a
imistaken shortening of the fuller name 'Argentine Republic'. 'The Argentine'
ifell out of fashion during the mid-to-late 20th century, and now the country
iis referred to as "Argentina".
i
i===== History =====
i
iThe earliest traces of human life in the area now known as Argentina are
idated from the Paleolithic period, with further traces in the Mesolithic and
iNeolithic.[13] Until the period of European colonization, Argentina was
irelatively sparsely populated by a wide number of diverse cultures with
idifferent social organizations,[40] which can be divided into three main
igroups.[41]
i
iThe first group are basic hunters and food gatherers without the development
iof pottery, such as the Selknam and Yaghan in the extreme south. The second
igroup are advanced hunters and food gatherers which include the Puelche,
iQuerandí and Serranos in the centre-east; and the Tehuelche in the south—all
iof them conquered by the Mapuche spreading from Chile[42]—and the Kom and
iWichi in the north. The last group are farmers with pottery, like the
iCharrúa,
iMinuane and Guaraní in the northeast, with slash and burn semisedentary
iexistence;[40] the advanced Diaguita sedentary trading culture in the
inorthwest, which was conquered by the Inca Empire around 1480; the Toconoté
iand Hênîa and Kâmîare in the country's centre, and the Huarpe in the
icentre-west, a culture that raised llama cattle and was strongly influenced
iby
ithe Incas.[40]
i
iEuropeans first arrived in the region with the 1502 voyage of Amerigo
iVespucci. The Spanish navigators Juan Díaz de Solís and Sebastian Cabot
ivisited the territory that is now Argentina in 1516 and 1526,
irespectively.[14] In 1536 Pedro de Mendoza founded the small settlement of
iBuenos Aires, which was abandoned in 1541.[43]
i
iFurther colonization efforts came from Paraguay—establishing the Governorate
iof the Río de la Plata—Peru and Chile.[44] Francisco de Aguirre founded
iSantiago del Estero in 1553. Londres was founded in 1558; Mendoza, in 1561;
iSan Juan, in 1562; San Miguel de Tucumán, in 1565.[45] Juan de Garay founded
iSanta Fe in 1573 and the same year Jerónimo Luis de Cabrera set up
iCórdoba.[46] Garay went further south to re-found Buenos Aires in 1580.[47]
iSan Luis was established in 1596.[45]
i
iThe Spanish Empire subordinated the economic potential of the Argentine
iterritory to the immediate wealth of the silver and gold mines in Bolivia and
iPeru, and as such it became part of the Viceroyalty of Peru until the
icreation
iof the Viceroyalty of the Río de la Plata in 1776 with Buenos Aires as its
icapital.[48]
i
iBuenos Aires repelled two ill-fated British invasions in 1806 and 1807.[49]
iThe ideas of the Age of Enlightenment and the example of the first Atlantic
iRevolutions generated criticism of the absolutist monarchy that ruled the
icountry. As in the rest of Spanish America, the overthrow of Ferdinand VII
iduring the Peninsular War created great concern.[50]
i
iBeginning a process from which Argentina was to emerge as successor state to
ithe Viceroyalty,[15] the 1810 May Revolution replaced the viceroy Baltasar
iHidalgo de Cisneros with the First Junta, a new government in Buenos Aires
icomposed by locals.[50] In the first clashes of the Independence War the
iJunta
icrushed a royalist counter-revolution in Córdoba,[51] but failed to overcome
ithose of the Banda Oriental, Upper Peru and Paraguay, which later became
iindependent states.[52] The French-Argentine Hippolyte Bouchard then brought
ihis fleet to wage war against Spain overseas and attacked Spanish California,
iSpanish Peru and Spanish Philippines. He secured the allegiance of escaped
iFilipinos in San Blas who defected from the Spanish to join the Argentine
inavy, due to common Argentine and Philippine grievances against Spanish
icolonization.[53][54] At a later date, the Argentine of Inca origin Sun of
iMay
iwas adopted as a symbol by the Filipinos in the Philippine Revolution against
iSpain. He also secured the diplomatic recognition of Argentina from King
iKamehameha I of the Kingdom of Hawaii. Historian Pacho O'Donnell affirms that
iHawaii was the first state that recognized Argentina's independence.[55]He
iwas
ifinally arrested in 1819 by Chilean patriots.
i
iRevolutionaries split into two antagonist groups: the Centralists and the
iFederalists—a move that would define Argentina's first decades of
iindependence.[56] The Assembly of the Year XIII appointed Gervasio Antonio de
iPosadas as Argentina's first Supreme Director.[56]
i
iOn 9 July 1816, the Congress of Tucumán formalized the Declaration of
iIndependence,[57] which is now celebrated as Independence Day, a national
iholiday.[58] One year later General Martín Miguel de Güemes stopped royalists
ion the north, and General José de San Martín He joined Bernardo Ogigins and
ithey led a combined army across the Andes and secured the independence of
iChile; then it was sent by Ogigins orders to the Spanish stronghold of Lima
iand proclaimed the independence of Peru.[59][E] In 1819 Buenos Aires enacted
ia
icentralist constitution that was soon abrogated by federalists.[61]
i
iSome of the most important figures of Argentine independence made a proposal
iknown as the Inca plan of 1816, which proposed that United Provinces of the
iRío de la Plata (Present Argentina) should be a monarchy, led by a descendant
iof the Inca. Juan Bautista Túpac Amaru (half-brother of Túpac Amaru II) was
iproposed as monarch.[62] Some examples of those who supported this proposal
iwere Manuel Belgrano, José de San Martín and Martín Miguel de Güemes. The
iCongress of Tucumán finally decided to reject the Inca plan, creating instead
ia republican, centralist state.[63][64]
i
iThe 1820 Battle of Cepeda, fought between the Centralists and the
iFederalists, resulted in the end of the Supreme Director rule. In 1826 Buenos
iAires enacted another centralist constitution, with Bernardino Rivadavia
ibeing
iappointed as the first president of the country. However, the interior
iprovinces soon rose against him, forced his resignation and discarded the
iconstitution.[65] Centralists and Federalists resumed the civil war; the
ilatter prevailed and formed the Argentine Confederation in 1831, led by Juan
iManuel de Rosas.[66] During his regime he faced a French blockade
i(1838–1840),
ithe War of the Confederation (1836–1839), and a combined Anglo-French
iblockade
i(1845–1850), but remained undefeated and prevented further loss of national
iterritory.[67] His trade restriction policies, however, angered the interior
iprovinces and in 1852 Justo José de Urquiza, another powerful caudillo, beat
ihim out of power. As the new president of the Confederation, Urquiza enacted
ithe liberal and federal 1853 Constitution. Buenos Aires seceded but was
iforced
iback into the Confederation after being defeated in the 1859 Battle of
iCepeda.[68]
i
iOverpowering Urquiza in the 1861 Battle of Pavón, Bartolomé Mitre secured
iBuenos Aires' predominance and was elected as the first president of the
ireunified country. He was followed by Domingo Faustino Sarmiento and Nicolás
iAvellaneda; these three presidencies set up the basis of the modern Argentine
iState.[69]
i
iStarting with Julio Argentino Roca in 1880, ten consecutive federal
igovernments emphasized liberal economic policies. The massive wave of
iEuropean
iimmigration they promoted—second only to the United States'—led to a
inear-reinvention of Argentine society and economy that by 1908 had placed the
icountry as the seventh wealthiest[20] developed nation[21] in the world.
iDriven by this immigration wave and decreasing mortality, the Argentine
ipopulation grew fivefold and the economy 15-fold:[70] from 1870 to 1910
iArgentina's wheat exports went from 100,000 to 2,500,000 t (110,000 to
i2,760,000 short tons) per year, while frozen beef exports increased from
i25,000 to 365,000 t (28,000 to 402,000 short tons) per year,[71] placing
iArgentina as one of the world's top five exporters.[72] Its railway mileage
irose from 503 to 31,104 km (313 to 19,327 mi).[73] Fostered by a new public,
icompulsory, free and secular education system, literacy quickly increased
ifrom
i22% to 65%, a level higher than most Latin American nations would reach even
ififty years later.[72] Furthermore, real GDP grew so fast that despite the
ihuge immigration influx, per capita income between 1862 and 1920 went from
i67%
iof developed country levels to 100%:[73] In 1865, Argentina was already one
iof
ithe top 25 nations by per capita income. By 1908, it had surpassed Denmark,
iCanada and the Netherlands to reach 7th place—behind Switzerland, New
iZealand,
iAustralia, the United States, the United Kingdom and Belgium. Argentina's per
icapita income was 70% higher than Italy's, 90% higher than Spain's, 180%
ihigher than Japan's and 400% higher than Brazil's.[20] Despite these unique
iachievements, the country was slow to meet its original goals of
iindustrialization:[74] after the steep development of capital-intensive local
iindustries in the 1920s, a significant part of the manufacturing sector
iremained labour-intensive in the 1930s.[75]
i
iBetween 1878 and 1884 the so-called Conquest of the Desert occurred, with the
ipurpose of tripling the Argentine territory by means of the constant
iconfrontations between natives and Criollos in the border,[77] and the
iappropriation of the indigenous territories. The first conquest consisted of
ia
iseries of military incursions into the Pampa and Patagonian territories
idominated by the indigenous peoples,[78] distributing them among the members
iof the Sociedad Rural Argentina, financiers of the expeditions.[79] The
iconquest of Chaco lasted up to the end of the century,[80] since its full
iownership of the national economic system only took place when the mere
iextraction of wood and tannin was replaced by the production of cotton.[81]
iThe Argentine government considered indigenous people as inferior beings,
iwithout the same rights as Criollos and Europeans.[82]
i
iIn 1912, President Roque Sáenz Peña enacted universal and secret male
isuffrage, which allowed Hipólito Yrigoyen, leader of the Radical Civic Union
i(or UCR), to win the 1916 election. He enacted social and economic reforms
iand
iextended assistance to small farms and businesses. Argentina stayed neutral
iduring World War I. The second administration of Yrigoyen faced an economic
icrisis, precipitated by the Great Depression.[83]
i
iIn 1930, Yrigoyen was ousted from power by the military led by José Félix
iUriburu. Although Argentina remained among the fifteen richest countries
iuntil
imid-century,[20] this coup d'état marks the start of the steady economic and
isocial decline that pushed the country back into underdevelopment.[26]
i
iUriburu ruled for two years; then Agustín Pedro Justo was elected in a
ifraudulent election, and signed a controversial treaty with the United
iKingdom. Argentina stayed neutral during World War II, a decision that had
ifull British support but was rejected by the United States after the attack
ion
iPearl Harbor. In 1943 a military coup d'état led by General Arturo Rawson
itoppled the democratically elected government of Ramón Castillo. Under
ipressure from the United States, later Argentina declared war on the Axis
iPowers (on 27 March 1945, roughly a month before the end of World War II in
iEurope).
i
iDuring the Rawson dictatorship a relatively unknown military colonel named
iJuan Perón was named head of the Labour Department. Perón quickly managed to
iclimb the political ladder, being named Minister of Defence by 1944. Being
iperceived as a political threat by rivals in the military and the
iconservative
icamp, he was forced to resign in 1945, and was arrested days later. He was
ifinally released under mounting pressure from both his base and several
iallied
iunions.[84] He would later become president after a landslide victory over
ithe
iUCR in the 1946 general election as the Laborioust candidate.[85]
i
iThe Labour Party (later renamed Justicialist Party), the most powerful and
iinfluential party in Argentine history, came into power with the rise of Juan
iPerón to the presidency in 1946. He nationalized strategic industries and
iservices, improved wages and working conditions, paid the full external debt
iand claimed he achieved nearly full employment. He pushed Congress to enact
iwomen's suffrage in 1947,[86] and developed a system of social assistance for
ithe most vulnerable sectors of society.[87] The economy began to decline in
i1950 due in part to government expenditures and the protectionist economic
ipolicies.[88]
i
iHe also engaged in a campaign of political suppression. Anyone who was
iperceived to be a political dissident or potential rival was subject to
ithreats, physical violence and harassment. The Argentine intelligentsia, the
imiddle-class, university students, and professors were seen as particularly
itroublesome. Perón fired over 2,000 university professors and faculty members
ifrom all major public education institutions.[89]
i
iPerón tried to bring most trade and labour unions under his thumb, regularly
iresorting to violence when needed. For instance, the meat-packers union
ileader, Cipriano Reyes, organised strikes in protest against the government
iafter elected labour movement officials were forcefully replaced by Peronist
ipuppets from the Peronist Party. Reyes was soon arrested on charges of
iterrorism, though the allegations were never substantiated. Reyes, who was
inever formally charged, was tortured in prison for five years and only
ireleased after the regime's downfall in 1955.[90]
i
iPerón managed to get reelected in 1951. His wife Eva Perón, who played a
icritical role in the party, died of cancer in 1952. As the economy continued
ito tank, Perón started losing popular support, and came to be seen as a
ithreat
ito the national process. The Navy took advantage of Perón's withering
ipolitical power, and bombed the Plaza de Mayo in 1955. Perón survived the
iattack, but a few months later, during the Liberating Revolution coup, he was
ideposed and went into exile in Spain.[91]
i
iThe new head of State, Pedro Eugenio Aramburu, proscribed Peronism and banned
ithe party from any future elections. Arturo Frondizi from the UCR won the
i1958
igeneral election.[92] He encouraged investment to achieve energetic and
iindustrial self-sufficiency, reversed a chronic trade deficit and lifted the
iban on Peronism; yet his efforts to stay on good terms with both the
iPeronists
iand the military earned him the rejection of both and a new coup forced him
iout.[93] Amidst the political turmoil, Senate leader José María Guido reacted
iswiftly and applied anti-power vacuum legislation, ascending to the
ipresidency
ihimself; elections were repealed and Peronism was prohibited once again.
iArturo Illia was elected in 1963 and led an increase in prosperity across the
iboard; however he was overthrown in 1966 by another military coup d'état led
iby General Juan Carlos Onganía in the self-proclaimed Argentine Revolution,
icreating a new military government that sought to rule indefinitely.[94]
i
iFollowing several years of military rule, Alejandro Agustín Lanusse was
iappointed president by the military junta in 1971. Under increasing political
ipressure for the return of democracy, Lanusse called for elections in 1973.
iPerón was banned from running but the Peronist party was allowed to
iparticipate. The presidential elections were won by Perón's surrogate
icandidate, Hector Cámpora, a left-wing Peronist, who took office on 25 May
i1973. A month later, in June, Perón returned from Spain. One of Cámpora's
ifirst presidential actions was to grant amnesty to members of organizations
ithat had carried out political assassinations and terrorist attacks, and to
ithose who had been tried and sentenced to prison by judges. Cámpora's
imonths-long tenure in government was beset by political and social unrest.
iOver 600 social conflicts, strikes, and factory occupations took place within
ia single month.[95] Even though far-left terrorist organisations had
isuspended
itheir armed struggle, their joining with the participatory democracy process
iwas interpreted as a direct threat by the Peronist right-wing faction.[96]
i
iAmid a state of political, social, and economic upheaval, Cámpora and Vice
iPresident Vicente Solano Lima resigned in July 1973, calling for new
ielections, but this time with Perón as the Justicialist Party nominee. Perón
iwon the election with his wife Isabel Perón as vice president. Perón's third
iterm was marked by escalating conflict between left and right-wing factions
iwithin the Peronist party, as well as the return of armed terror guerrilla
igroups like the Guevarist ERP, leftist Peronist Montoneros, and the
istate-backed far-right Triple A. After a series of heart attacks and signs of
ipneumonia in 1974, Perón's health deteriorated quickly. He suffered a final
iheart attack on Monday, 1 July 1974, and died at 13:15. He was 78 years old.
iAfter his death, Isabel Perón, his wife and vice president, succeeded him in
ioffice. During her presidency, a military junta, along with the Peronists'
ifar-right fascist faction, once again became the de facto head of state.
iIsabel Perón served as President of Argentina from 1974 until 1976, when she
iwas ousted by the military. Her short presidency was marked by the collapse
iof
iArgentine political and social systems, leading to a constitutional crisis
ithat paved the way for a decade of instability, left-wing terrorist guerrilla
iattacks, and state-sponsored terrorism.[88][97][98]
i
iThe "Dirty War" (Spanish: Guerra Sucia) was part of Operation Condor, which
iincluded the participation of other right-wing dictatorships in the Southern
iCone. The Dirty War involved state terrorism in Argentina and elsewhere in
ithe
iSouthern Cone against political dissidents, with military and security forces
iemploying urban and rural violence against left-wing guerrillas, political
idissidents, and anyone believed to be associated with socialism or somehow
icontrary to the neoliberal economic policies of the regime.[99][100][101]
iVictims of the violence in Argentina alone included an estimated 15,000 to
i30,000 left-wing activists and militants, including trade unionists,
istudents,
ijournalists, Marxists, Peronist guerrillas,[102] and alleged sympathizers.
iMost of the victims were casualties of state terrorism. The opposing
iguerrillas' victims numbered nearly 500–540 military and police
iofficials[103]
iand up to 230 civilians.[104] Argentina received technical support and
imilitary aid from the United States government during the Johnson, Nixon,
iFord, Carter, and Reagan administrations.
i
iThe exact chronology of the repression is still debated, yet the roots of the
ilong political war may have started in 1969 when trade unionists were
itargeted
ifor assassination by Peronist and Marxist paramilitaries. Individual cases of
istate-sponsored terrorism against Peronism and the left can be traced back
ieven further to the Bombing of Plaza de Mayo in 1955. The Trelew massacre of
i1972, the actions of the Argentine Anticommunist Alliance commencing in 1973,
iand Isabel Perón's "annihilation decrees" against left-wing guerrillas during
iOperativo Independencia (Operation Independence) in 1975, are also possible
ievents signaling the beginning of the Dirty War.[F]
i
iOnganía shut down Congress, banned all political parties, and dismantled
istudent and worker unions. In 1969, popular discontent led to two massive
iprotests: the Cordobazo and the Rosariazo. The terrorist guerrilla
iorganization Montoneros kidnapped and executed Aramburu.[108] The newly
ichosen
ihead of government, Alejandro Agustín Lanusse, seeking to ease the growing
ipolitical pressure, allowed Héctor José Cámpora to become the Peronist
icandidate instead of Perón. Cámpora won the March 1973 election, issued
ipardons for condemned guerrilla members, and then secured Perón's return from
ihis exile in Spain.[109]
i
iOn the day Perón returned to Argentina, the clash between Peronist internal
ifactions—right-wing union leaders and left-wing youth from the
iMontoneros—resulted in the Ezeiza Massacre. Overwhelmed by political
iviolence,
iCámpora resigned and Perón won the following September 1973 election with his
ithird wife Isabel as vice-president. He expelled Montoneros from the
iparty[110] and they became once again a clandestine organization. José López
iRega organized the Argentine Anticommunist Alliance (AAA) to fight against
ithem and the People's Revolutionary Army (ERP).[111][112]
i
iPerón died in July 1974 and was succeeded by his wife, who signed a secret
idecree empowering the military and the police to "annihilate" the left-wing
isubversion,[113] stopping ERP's attempt to start a rural insurgence in
iTucumán
iprovince.[114] Isabel Perón was ousted one year later by a junta of the
icombined armed forces, led by army general Jorge Rafael Videla. They
iinitiated
ithe National Reorganization Process, often shortened to Proceso.[115]
i
iThe Proceso shut down Congress, removed the judges on the Supreme Court,
ibanned political parties and unions, and resorted to employing the forced
idisappearance of suspected guerrilla members including individuals suspected
iof being associated with the left-wing. By the end of 1976, the Montoneros
ihad
ilost nearly 2,000 members and by 1977, the ERP was completely subdued.
iNevertheless, the severely weakened Montoneros launched a counterattack in
i1979, which was quickly put down, effectively ending the guerrilla threat and
isecuring the junta's position in power.[citation needed]
i
iIn 1982, the head of state, General Leopoldo Galtieri, authorised the
iinvasion of the British territories of South Georgia and, on 2 April, of the
iFalkland Islands. The occupation provoked a military response from the United
iKingdom leading to the Falklands War. Argentine forces were defeated and
isurrendered to British troops on 14 June. Street riots in Buenos Aires
ifollowed the defeat[116] and the military leadership responsible for the
ihumiliation withdrew.[117] Reynaldo Bignone replaced Galtieri and began to
iorganize the transition to democratic governance.[118]
i
iRaúl Alfonsín won the 1983 elections campaigning for the prosecution of those
iresponsible for human rights violations during the Proceso: the Trial of the
iJuntas and other martial courts sentenced all the coup's leaders but, under
imilitary pressure, he also enacted the Full Stop and Due Obedience
ilaws,[119][120] which halted prosecutions further down the chain of command.
iThe worsening economic crisis and hyperinflation reduced his popular support
iand the Peronist Carlos Menem won the 1989 election. Soon after, riots forced
iAlfonsín to an early resignation.[121]
i
iMenem embraced and enacted neoliberal policies:[122] a fixed exchange rate,
ibusiness deregulation, privatizations, and the dismantling of protectionist
ibarriers normalized the economy in the short term. He pardoned the officers
iwho had been sentenced during Alfonsín's government. The 1994 Constitutional
iAmendment allowed Menem to be elected for a second term. With the economy
ibeginning to decline in 1995, and with increasing unemployment and
irecession,[123] the UCR, led by Fernando de la Rúa, returned to the
ipresidency
iin the 1999 elections.[124]
i
iDe la Rúa left Menem's economic plan in effect despite the worsening crisis,
iwhich led to growing social discontent.[123] Massive capital flight from the
icountry was responded to with a freezing of bank accounts, generating further
iturmoil. The December 2001 riots forced him to resign.[125] Congress
iappointed
iEduardo Duhalde as acting president, who revoked the fixed exchange rate
iestablished by Menem,[126] causing many working- and middle-class Argentines
ito lose a significant portion of their savings. By late 2002, the economic
icrisis began to recede, but the assassination of two piqueteros by the police
icaused political unrest, prompting Duhalde to move elections forward.[127]
iNéstor Kirchner was elected as the new president. On 26 May 2003, he was
isworn
iin.[128][129]
i
iBoosting the neo-Keynesian economic policies[127] laid by Duhalde, Kirchner
iended the economic crisis attaining significant fiscal and trade surpluses,
iand rapid GDP growth.[130] Under his administration, Argentina restructured
iits defaulted debt with an unprecedented discount of about 70% on most bonds,
ipaid off debts with the International Monetary Fund,[131] purged the military
iof officers with dubious human rights records,[132] nullified and voided the
iFull Stop and Due Obedience laws,[133][G] ruled them as unconstitutional, and
iresumed legal prosecution of the Junta's crimes. He did not run for
ireelection, promoting instead the candidacy of his wife, senator Cristina
iFernández de Kirchner, who was elected in 2007[135] and subsequently
ireelected
iin 2011. Fernández de Kirchner's administration established positive foreign
irelations with countries with questionable human rights records, including
iVenezuela, Iran, and Cuba, while at the same time relations with the United
iStates and the United Kingdom became increasingly strained. By 2015, the
iArgentine GDP grew by 2.7%[136] and real incomes had risen over 50% since the
ipost-Menem era.[137] Despite these economic gains and increased renewable
ienergy production and subsidies, the overall economy had been sluggish since
i2011.[138]
i
iOn 22 November 2015, after a tie in the first round of presidential elections
ion 25 October, center-right coalition candidate Mauricio Macri won the first
iballotage in Argentina's history, beating Front for Victory candidate Daniel
iScioli and becoming president-elect.[139] Macri was the first democratically
ielected non-peronist president since 1916 that managed to complete his term
iin
ioffice without being overthrown.[140] He took office on 10 December 2015 and
iinherited an economy with a high inflation rate and in a poor shape.[141] In
iApril 2016, the Macri Government introduced neoliberal austerity measures
iintended to tackle inflation and overblown public deficits.[142] Under
iMacri's
iadministration, economic recovery remained elusive with GDP shrinking 3.4%,
iinflation totaling 240%, billions of US dollars issued in sovereign debt, and
imass poverty increasing by the end of his term.[143][144] He ran for
ire-election in 2019 but lost by nearly eight percentage points to Alberto
iFernández, the Justicialist Party candidate.[145]
i
iPresident Alberto Fernández and Vice President Cristina Fernández de Kirchner
itook office in December 2019,[146] just months before the COVID-19 pandemic
ihit Argentina and among accusations of corruption, bribery and misuse of
ipublic funds during Nestor and Cristina Fernández de Kirchner's
ipresidencies.[147][148] On 14 November 2021, the center-left coalition of
iArgentina's ruling Peronist party, Frente de Todos (Front for Everyone), lost
iits majority in Congress, for the first time in almost 40 years, in midterm
ilegislative elections. The election victory of the center-right coalition,
iJuntos por el Cambio (Together for Change), meant a tough final two years in
ioffice for President Alberto Fernandez. Losing control of the Senate made it
idifficult for him to make key appointments, including to the judiciary. It
ialso forced him to negotiate with the opposition every initiative he sends to
ithe legislature.[149][150]
i
iIn April 2023, President Alberto Fernandez announced that he will not seek
ire-election in the next presidential election.[151]
i
i===== Geography =====
i
iWith a mainland surface area of 2,780,400 km2 (1,073,518 sq mi),[B] Argentina
iis located in southern South America, sharing land borders with Chile across
ithe Andes to the west;[152] Bolivia and Paraguay to the north; Brazil to the
inortheast, Uruguay and the South Atlantic Ocean to the east;[153] and the
iDrake Passage to the south;[154] for an overall land border length of 9,376
ikm
i(5,826 mi). Its coastal border over the Río de la Plata and South Atlantic
iOcean is 5,117 km (3,180 mi) long.[153]
i
iArgentina's highest point is Aconcagua in the Mendoza province (6,959 m
i(22,831 ft) above sea level),[155] also the highest point in the Southern and
iWestern Hemispheres.[156] The lowest point is Laguna del Carbón in the San
iJulián Great Depression Santa Cruz province (−105 m (−344 ft) below sea
ilevel,[155] also the lowest point in the Southern and Western Hemispheres,
iand
ithe seventh lowest point on Earth)[157]
i
iThe northernmost point is at the confluence of the Grande de San Juan and
iMojinete rivers in Jujuy province; the southernmost is Cape San Pío in Tierra
idel Fuego province; the easternmost is northeast of Bernardo de Irigoyen,
iMisiones and the westernmost is within Los Glaciares National Park in Santa
iCruz province.[153] The maximum north–south distance is 3,694 km (2,295 mi),
iwhile the maximum east–west one is 1,423 km (884 mi).[153]
i
iSome of the major rivers are the Paraná, Uruguay—which join to form the Río
ide la Plata, Paraguay, Salado, Negro, Santa Cruz, Pilcomayo, Bermejo and
iColorado.[158] These rivers are discharged into the Argentine Sea, the
ishallow
iarea of the Atlantic Ocean over the Argentine Shelf, an unusually wide
icontinental platform.[159] Its waters are influenced by two major ocean
icurrents: the warm Brazil Current and the cold Falklands Current.[160]
i
iArgentina is one of the most biodiverse countries in the world[163] hosting
ione of the greatest ecosystem varieties in the world: 15 continental zones, 2
imarine zones, and the Antarctic region are all represented in its
iterritory.[163] This huge ecosystem variety has led to a biological diversity
ithat is among the world's largest:[163][164] 9,372 cataloged vascular plant
ispecies (ranked 24th);[H] 1,038 cataloged bird species (ranked 14th);[I] 375
icataloged mammal species (ranked 12th);[J] 338 cataloged reptilian species
i(ranked 16th); and 162 cataloged amphibian species (ranked 19th).
i
iThe original pampa had virtually no trees; some imported species like the
iAmerican sycamore or eucalyptus are present along roads or in towns and
icountry estates (estancias). The only tree-like plant native to the pampa is
ithe evergreen Ombú. The surface soils of the pampa are a deep black color,
iprimarily mollisols, known commonly as humus. This makes the region one of
ithe
imost agriculturally productive on Earth; however, this is also responsible
ifor
idecimating much of the original ecosystem, to make way for commercial
iagriculture.[165] The western pampas receive less rainfall, this dry pampa is
ia plain of short grasses or steppe.[166][167]
i
iThe National Parks of Argentina make up a network of 35 national parks in
iArgentina. The parks cover a very varied set of terrains and biotopes, from
iBaritú National Park on the northern border with Bolivia to Tierra del Fuego
iNational Park in the far south of the continent. The Administración de
iParques
iNacionales (National Parks Administration) is the agency that preserves and
imanages these national parks along with Natural monuments and National
iReserves within the country.[168] Argentina had a 2018 Forest Landscape
iIntegrity Index mean score of 7.21/10, ranking it 47th globally out of 172
icountries.[169]
i
iIn general, Argentina has four main climate types: warm, moderate, arid, and
icold, all determined by the expanse across latitude, range in altitude, and
irelief features.[170][171] Although the most populated areas are generally
itemperate, Argentina has an exceptional amount of climate diversity,[172]
iranging from subtropical in the north to polar in the far south.[173]
iConsequently, there is a wide variety of biomes in the country, including
isubtropical rain forests, semi-arid and arid regions, temperate plains in the
iPampas, and cold subantarctic in the south.[174] The average annual
iprecipitation ranges from 150 millimetres (6 in) in the driest parts of
iPatagonia to over 2,000 millimetres (79 in) in the westernmost parts of
iPatagonia and the northeastern parts of the country.[172] Mean annual
itemperatures range from 5 °C (41 °F) in the far south to 25 °C (77 °F) in the
inorth.[172]
i
iMajor wind currents include the cool Pampero Winds blowing on the flat plains
iof Patagonia and the Pampas; following the cold front, warm currents blow
ifrom
ithe north in middle and late winter, creating mild conditions.[175] The
iSudestada usually moderates cold temperatures but brings very heavy rains,
irough seas and coastal flooding. It is most common in late autumn and winter
ialong the central coast and in the Río de la Plata estuary.[175] The Zonda, a
ihot dry wind, affects Cuyo and the central Pampas. Squeezed of all moisture
iduring the 6,000 m (19,685 ft) descent from the Andes, Zonda winds can blow
ifor hours with gusts up to 120 km/h (75 mph), fueling wildfires and causing
idamage; between June and November, when the Zonda blows, snowstorms and
iblizzard (viento blanco) conditions usually affect higher elevations.[176]
i
iClimate change in Argentina is predicted to have significant effects on the
iliving conditions in Argentina.[177]: 30  The climate of Argentina is
ichanging
iwith regards to precipitation patterns and temperatures. The highest
iincreases
iin precipitation (from the period 1960–2010) have occurred in the eastern
iparts of the country. The increase in precipitation has led to more
ivariability in precipitation from year to year in the northern parts of the
icountry, with a higher risk of prolonged droughts, disfavoring agriculture in
ithese regions.
i
i===== Politics =====
i
iIn the 20th century, Argentina experienced significant political turmoil and
idemocratic reversals.[178][179] Between 1930 and 1976, the armed forces
ioverthrew six governments in Argentina;[179] and the country alternated
iperiods of democracy (1912–1930, 1946–1955, and 1973–1976) with periods of
irestricted democracy and military rule.[178] Following a transition that
ibegan
iin 1983,[180] full-scale democracy in Argentina was reestablished.[178][179]
iArgentina's democracy endured through the 2001–02 crisis and to the present
iday; it is regarded as more robust than both its pre-1983 predecessors and
iother democracies in Latin America.[179]
i
iArgentina is a federal constitutional republic and representative
idemocracy.[182] The government is regulated by a system of checks and
ibalances
idefined by the Constitution of Argentina, the country's supreme legal
idocument. The seat of government is the city of Buenos Aires, as designated
iby
iCongress.[183] Suffrage is universal, equal, secret and mandatory.[184][K]
i
iThe federal government is composed of three branches. The Legislative branch
iconsists of the bicameral Congress, made up of the Senate and the Chamber of
iDeputies. The Congress makes federal law, declares war, approves treaties and
ihas the power of the purse and of impeachment, by which it can remove sitting
imembers of the government.[186] The Chamber of Deputies represents the people
iand has 257 voting members elected to a four-year term. Seats are apportioned
iamong the provinces by population every tenth year.[187] As of 2014[update]
iten provinces have just five deputies while the Buenos Aires Province, being
ithe most populous one, has 70. The Chamber of Senators represents the
iprovinces, and has 72 members elected at-large to six-year terms, with each
iprovince having three seats; one-third of Senate seats are up for election
ievery other year.[188] At least one-third of the candidates presented by the
iparties must be women.
i
iIn the Executive branch, the President is the commander-in-chief of the
imilitary, can veto legislative bills before they become law—subject to
iCongressional override—and appoints the members of the Cabinet and other
iofficers, who administer and enforce federal laws and policies.[189] The
iPresident is elected directly by the vote of the people, serves a four-year
iterm and may be elected to office no more than twice in a row.[190]
i
iThe Judicial branch includes the Supreme Court and lower federal courts
iinterpret laws and overturn those they find unconstitutional.[191] The
iJudicial is independent of the Executive and the Legislative. The Supreme
iCourt has seven members appointed by the President—subject to Senate
iapproval—who serve for life. The lower courts' judges are proposed by the
iCouncil of Magistracy (a secretariat composed of representatives of judges,
ilawyers, researchers, the Executive and the Legislative), and appointed by
ithe
ipresident on Senate approval.[192]
i
iArgentina is a federation of twenty-three provinces and one autonomous city,
iBuenos Aires. Provinces are divided for administration purposes into
idepartments and municipalities, except for Buenos Aires Province, which is
idivided into partidos. The City of Buenos Aires is divided into communes.
i
iProvinces hold all the power that they chose not to delegate to the federal
igovernment;[193] they must be representative republics and must not
icontradict
ithe Constitution.[194] Beyond this they are fully autonomous: they enact
itheir
iown constitutions,[195] freely organize their local governments,[196] and own
iand manage their natural and financial resources.[197] Some provinces have
ibicameral legislatures, while others have unicameral ones.[L]
i
iLa Pampa and Chaco became provinces in 1951. Misiones did so in 1953, and
iFormosa, Neuquén, Río Negro, Chubut and Santa Cruz, in 1955. The last
inational
iterritory, Tierra del Fuego, became the Tierra del Fuego, Antártida e Islas
idel Atlántico Sur Province in 1990.[199] It has three components, although
itwo
iare nominal because they are not under Argentine sovereignty. The first is
ithe
iArgentine part of Tierra del Fuego; the second is an area of Antarctica
iclaimed by Argentina that overlaps with similar areas claimed by the UK and
iChile; the third comprises the two disputed British Overseas Territories of
ithe Falkland Islands and South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands.[200]
i
iForeign policy is handled by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, International
iTrade and Worship, which answers to the President. The country is one of the
iG-15 and G-20 major economies of the world, and a founding member of the UN,
iWBG, WTO and OAS. In 2012 Argentina was elected again to a two-year
inon-permanent position on the United Nations Security Council and is
iparticipating in major peacekeeping operations in Haiti, Cyprus, Western
iSahara and the Middle East.[201] Argentina is described as a middle
ipower.[27][202]
i
iA prominent Latin American[28] and Southern Cone[29] regional power,
iArgentina co-founded OEI and CELAC. It is also a founding member of the
iMercosur block, having Brazil, Paraguay, Uruguay and Venezuela as partners.
iSince 2002 the country has emphasized its key role in Latin American
iintegration, and the block—which has some supranational legislative
ifunctions—is its first international priority.[203]
i
iArgentina claims 965,597 km2 (372,819 sq mi) in Antarctica, where it has the
iworld's oldest continuous state presence, since 1904.[204] This overlaps
iclaims by Chile and the United Kingdom, though all such claims fall under the
iprovisions of the 1961 Antarctic Treaty, of which Argentina is a founding
isignatory and permanent consulting member, with the Antarctic Treaty
iSecretariat being based in Buenos Aires.[205]
i
iArgentina disputes sovereignty over the Falkland Islands (Spanish: Islas
iMalvinas), and South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands,[206] which are
iadministered by the United Kingdom as Overseas Territories. Argentina is a
iparty to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court.[207] Argentina
iis a Major non-NATO ally since 1998 [30] and an OECD candidate country since
iJanuary 2022.[208]
i
iThe president holds the title of commander-in-chief of the Argentine Armed
iForces, as part of a legal framework that imposes a strict separation between
inational defense and internal security systems:[209][210] The National
iDefense
iSystem, an exclusive responsibility of the federal government,[211]
icoordinated by the Ministry of Defense, and comprising the Army, the Navy and
ithe Air Force.[212] Ruled and monitored by Congress[213] through the Houses'
iDefense Committees,[214] it is organized on the essential principle of
ilegitimate self-defense: the repelling of any external military aggression in
iorder to guarantee freedom of the people, national sovereignty, and
iterritorial integrity.[214] Its secondary missions include committing to
imultinational operations within the framework of the United Nations,
iparticipating in internal support missions, assisting friendly countries, and
iestablishing a sub-regional defense system.[214]
i
iMilitary service is voluntary, with enlistment age between 18 and 24 years
iold and no conscription.[215] Argentina's defense has historically been one
iof
ithe best equipped in the region, even managing its own weapon research
ifacilities, shipyards, ordnance, tank and plane factories.[216] However, real
imilitary expenditures declined steadily after the defeat in the
iFalklands/Malvinas War and the defense budget in 2011 was only about 0.74% of
iGDP, a historical minimum,[217] below the Latin American average. Within the
idefence budget itself, funding for training and even basic maintenance has
ibeen significantly cut, a factor contributing to the accidental loss of the
iArgentine submarine San Juan in 2017. With the United Kingdom also actively
iacting to restrict even modest Argentine military modernization efforts,[218]
ithe result has been a steady erosion of Argentine military capabilities, with
isome arguing that Argentina had, by the end of the 2010s, ceased to be a
icapable military power.[219]
i
iThe Interior Security System is jointly administered by the federal and
isubscribing provincial governments.[210] At the federal level it is
icoordinated by the Interior, Security and Justice ministries, and monitored
iby
iCongress.[210] It is enforced by the Federal Police; the Prefecture, which
ifulfills coast guard duties; the Gendarmerie, which serves border guard
itasks;
iand the Airport Security Police.[220] At the provincial level it is
icoordinated by the respective internal security ministries and enforced by
ilocal police agencies.[210]
i
iArgentina was the only South American country to send warships and cargo
iplanes in 1991 to the Gulf War under UN mandate and has remained involved in
ipeacekeeping efforts in multiple locations like UNPROFOR in Croatia/Bosnia,
iGulf of Fonseca, UNFICYP in Cyprus (where among Army and Marines troops the
iAir Force provided the UN Air contingent since 1994) and MINUSTAH in Haiti.
iArgentina is the only Latin American country to maintain troops in Kosovo
iduring SFOR (and later EUFOR) operations where combat engineers of the
iArgentine Armed Forces are embedded in an Italian brigade.
i
iIn 2007, an Argentine contingent including helicopters, boats and water
ipurification plants was sent to help Bolivia against their worst floods in
idecades.[221] In 2010 the Armed Forces were also involved in Haiti and Chile
ihumanitarian responses after their respective earthquakes.
i
i===== Economy =====
i
iBenefiting from rich natural resources, a highly literate population, a
idiversified industrial base, and an export-oriented agricultural sector, the
ieconomy of Argentina is Latin America's third-largest,[222] and the second
ilargest in South America.[223] It has a "very high" rating on the Human
iDevelopment Index[12] and ranks 65th by nominal GDP per capita,[224] with a
iconsiderable internal market size and a growing share of the high-tech
isector.
iA middle emerging economy and one of the world's top developing nations, is a
imember of the G-20 major economies.[225][M]
i
iArgentina is the largest producer in the world of yerba mate (due to the
ilarge domestic consumption of mate), one of the 5 largest producers in the
iworld of soybeans, maize, sunflower seed, lemon and pear, one of the 10
ilargest producers in the world of barley, grape, artichoke, tobacco and
icotton, and one of the 15 largest producers in the world of wheat, sugarcane,
isorghum and grapefruit. It's the largest producer in South America of wheat,
isunflower seed, barley, lemon and pear.[227][228] In wine, Argentina is
iusually among the 10 largest producers in the world.[229] Argentina is also a
itraditional meat exporter, having been, in 2019, the 4th world producer of
ibeef, with a production of 3 million tons (only behind USA, Brazil and
iChina),
ithe 4th world producer of honey, and the 10th world producer of wool, in
iaddition to other relevant productions.[230][231]
i
iThe mining industry of Argentina is not as relevant as that of other
icountries. It stands out for being the 4th largest producer of lithium,[232]
i9th of silver[233] and 17th of gold[234] worldwide (2019 data). The country
istands out in the production of natural gas, being the largest producer in
iSouth America and the 18th largest in the world, and has an average annual
iproduction close to 500 thousand barrels/day of petroleum, even with the
iunder-utilization of the Vaca Muerta field, due to the country's technical
iand
ifinancial inability to extract these resources.[235][236]
i
iIn 2012[update] manufacturing accounted for 20.3% of GDP—the largest sector
iin the nation's economy.[237] Well-integrated into Argentine agriculture,
ihalf
iof the industrial exports have rural origin.[237] With a 6.5% production
igrowth rate in 2011[update],[238] the diversified manufacturing sector rests
ion a steadily growing network of industrial parks (314 as of
i2013[update])[239][240] In 2012[update] the leading sectors by volume were:
ifood processing, beverages and tobacco products; motor vehicles and auto
iparts; textiles and leather; refinery products and biodiesel; chemicals and
ipharmaceuticals; steel, aluminum and iron; industrial and farm machinery;
ihome
iappliances and furniture; plastics and tires; glass and cement; and recording
iand print media.[237] In addition, Argentina has since long been one of the
itop five wine-producing countries in the world.[237]
i
iHigh inflation—a weakness of the Argentine economy for decades—has become a
itrouble once again,[241] with an annual rate of 24.8% in 2017.[242] In 2023
ithe inflation reached 102.5% among the highest inflation rates in the
iworld.[243] Approximately 43% of the Argentina's population lives below the
ipoverty line as of 2023.[244] To deter it and support the peso, the
igovernment
iimposed foreign currency control.[245] Income distribution, having improved
isince 2002, is classified as "medium", although it is still considerably
iunequal.[11]
i
iArgentina ranks 85th out of 180 countries in the Transparency International's
i2017 Corruption Perceptions Index,[246] an improvement of 22 positions over
iits 2014 rankings.[247] Argentina settled its long-standing debt default
icrisis in 2016 with the so-called vulture funds after the election of
iMauricio
iMacri, allowing Argentina to enter capital markets for the first time in a
idecade.[248] In addition, Argentina has since long been one of the top five
iwine-producing countries in the world.[237] The government of Argentina
idefaulted on 22 May 2020 by failing to pay a $500 million due date to its
icreditors. Negotiations for the restructuring of $66 billion of its debt
icontinue.[249]
i
iThe country had 5.57 million visitors in 2013, ranking in terms of
iinternational tourist arrivals as the top destination in South America, and
isecond in Latin America after Mexico.[250] Revenues from international
itourists reached US$4.41 billion in 2013, down from US$4.89 billion in
i2012.[250] The country's capital city, Buenos Aires, is the most visited city
iin South America.[251] There are 30 National Parks of Argentina including
imany
iWorld Heritage Sites.
i
iBy 2004[update] Buenos Aires, all provincial capitals except Ushuaia, and all
imedium-sized towns were interconnected by 69,412 km (43,131 mi) of paved
iroads, out of a total road network of 231,374 km (143,769 mi).[252] In 2021,
ithe country had about 2,800 km (1,740 mi) of duplicated highways, most
ileaving
ithe capital Buenos Aires, linking it with cities like Rosario and Córdoba,
iSanta Fe, Mar del Plata and Paso de los Libres (in border with Brazil), there
iare also duplicated highways leaving from Mendoza towards the capital, and
ibetween Córdoba and Santa Fé, among other locations.[253] Nevertheless, this
iroad infrastructure is still inadequate and cannot handle the sharply growing
idemand caused by deterioration of the railway system.[254]
i
iArgentina has the largest railway system in Latin America, with 36,966 km
i(22,970 mi) of operating lines in 2008[update], out of a full network of
ialmost 48,000 km (29,826 mi).[255] This system links all 23 provinces plus
iBuenos Aires City, and connects with all neighbouring countries.[254] There
iare four incompatible gauges in use; this forces virtually all interregional
ifreight traffic to pass through Buenos Aires.[254] The system has been in
idecline since the 1940s: regularly running up large budgetary deficits, by
i1991 it was transporting 1,400 times less goods than it did in 1973.[254]
iHowever, in recent years the system has experienced a greater degree of
iinvestment from the state, in both commuter rail lines and long-distance
ilines, renewing rolling stock and infrastructure.[256][257] In April 2015, by
ioverwhelming majority the Argentine Senate passed a law which re-created
iFerrocarriles Argentinos (2015), effectively re-nationalising the country's
irailways, a move which saw support from all major political parties on both
isides of the political spectrum.[258][259][260]
i
iIn 2012[update] there were about 11,000 km (6,835 mi) of waterways,[261]
imostly comprising the La Plata, Paraná, Paraguay and Uruguay rivers, with
iBuenos Aires, Zárate, Campana, Rosario, San Lorenzo, Santa Fe, Barranqueras
iand San Nicolas de los Arroyos as the main fluvial ports. Some of the largest
isea ports are La Plata–Ensenada, Bahía Blanca, Mar del Plata,
iQuequén–Necochea, Comodoro Rivadavia, Puerto Deseado, Puerto Madryn, Ushuaia
iand San Antonio Oeste. Buenos Aires has historically been the most important
iport; however since the 1990s the Up-River port region has become dominant:
istretching along 67 km (42 mi) of the Paraná river shore in Santa Fe
iprovince,
iit includes 17 ports and in 2013[update] accounted for 50% of all exports.
i
iIn 2013[update] there were 161 airports with paved runways[262] out of more
ithan a thousand.[254] The Ezeiza International Airport, about 35 km (22 mi)
ifrom downtown Buenos Aires,[263] is the largest in the country, followed by
iCataratas del Iguazú in Misiones, and El Plumerillo in Mendoza.[254]
iAeroparque, in the city of Buenos Aires, is the most important domestic
iairport.[264]
i
iIn 2020, more than 60% of Argentina's electricity came from non-renewable
isources such as natural gas, oil and coal. 27% came from hydropower, 7.3%
ifrom
iwind and solar energy and 4.4% from nuclear energy.[266] At the end of 2021
iArgentina was the 21st country in the world in terms of installed
ihydroelectric power (11.3 GW), the 26th country in the world in terms of
iinstalled wind energy (3.2 GW) and the 43rd country in the world in terms of
iinstalled solar energy (1.0 GW).[267]
i
iThe wind potential of the Patagonia region is considered gigantic, with
iestimates that the area could provide enough electricity to sustain the
iconsumption of a country like Brazil alone. However, Argentina has
iinfrastructural deficiencies to carry out the transmission of electricity
ifrom
iuninhabited areas with a lot of wind to the great centers of the
icountry.[268]
i
iIn 1974 it was the first country in Latin America to put in-line a commercial
inuclear power plant, Atucha I. Although the Argentine-built parts for that
istation amounted to 10% of the total, the nuclear fuel it uses are since
ientirely built in the country. Later nuclear power stations employed a higher
ipercentage of Argentine-built components; Embalse, finished in 1983, a 30%
iand
ithe 2011 Atucha II reactor a 40%.[269]
i
iArgentines have received three Nobel Prizes in the Sciences. Bernardo
iHoussay, the first Latin American recipient, discovered the role of pituitary
ihormones in regulating glucose in animals, and shared the Nobel Prize in
iPhysiology or Medicine in 1947. Luis Leloir discovered how organisms store
ienergy converting glucose into glycogen and the compounds which are
ifundamental in metabolizing carbohydrates, receiving the Nobel Prize in
iChemistry in 1970. César Milstein did extensive research in antibodies,
isharing the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1984. Argentine research
ihas led to treatments for heart diseases and several forms of cancer. Domingo
iLiotta designed and developed the first artificial heart that was
isuccessfully
iimplanted in a human being in 1969. René Favaloro developed the techniques
iand
iperformed the world's first coronary bypass surgery.
i
iArgentina's nuclear programme has been highly successful. In 1957 Argentina
iwas the first country in Latin America to design and build a research reactor
iwith homegrown technology, the RA-1 Enrico Fermi. This reliance on the
idevelopment of its own nuclear-related technologies, instead of buying them
iabroad, was a constant of Argentina's nuclear programme conducted by the
icivilian National Atomic Energy Commission (CNEA). Nuclear facilities with
iArgentine technology have been built in Peru, Algeria, Australia and Egypt.
iIn
i1983, the country admitted having the capability of producing weapon-grade
iuranium, a major step needed to assemble nuclear weapons; since then,
ihowever,
iArgentina has pledged to use nuclear power only for peaceful purposes.[270]
iAs
ia member of the Board of Governors of the International Atomic Energy Agency,
iArgentina has been a strong voice in support of nuclear non-proliferation
iefforts[271] and is highly committed to global nuclear security.[272]
i
iDespite its modest budget and numerous setbacks, academics and the sciences
iin Argentina have enjoyed international respect since the turn of the 1900s,
iwhen Luis Agote devised the first safe and effective means of blood
itransfusion as well as René Favaloro, who was a pioneer in the improvement of
ithe coronary artery bypass surgery. Argentine scientists are still on the
icutting edge in fields such as nanotechnology, physics, computer sciences,
imolecular biology, oncology, ecology and cardiology. Juan Maldacena, an
iArgentine-American scientist, is a leading figure in string theory.
i
iSpace research has also become increasingly active in Argentina.
iArgentine-built satellites include LUSAT-1 (1990), Víctor-1 (1996),
iPEHUENSAT-1 (2007),[273] and those developed by CONAE, the Argentine space
iagency, of the SAC series.[274] Argentina has its own satellite programme,
inuclear power station designs (4th generation) and public nuclear energy
icompany INVAP, which provides several countries with nuclear reactors.[275]
iEstablished in 1991, the CONAE has since launched two satellites successfully
iand,[276] in June 2009, secured an agreement with the European Space Agency
ifor the installation of a 35-m diameter antenna and other mission support
ifacilities at the Pierre Auger Observatory, the world's foremost cosmic ray
iobservatory.[277] The facility will contribute to numerous ESA space probes,
ias well as CONAE's own, domestic research projects. Chosen from 20 potential
isites and one of only three such ESA installations in the world, the new
iantenna will create a triangulation which will allow the ESA to ensure
imission
icoverage around the clock[278] Argentina was ranked 73rd in the Global
iInnovation Index in 2021.[279][280][281][282]
i
i===== Demographics =====
i
iThe 2010 census counted 40,117,096 inhabitants, up from 36,260,130 in
i2001.[283][284] Argentina ranks third in South America in total population,
ifourth in Latin America and 33rd globally. Its population density of 15
ipersons per square kilometer of land area is well below the world average of
i50 persons. The population growth rate in 2010 was an estimated 1.03%
iannually, with a birth rate of 17.7 live births per 1,000 inhabitants and a
imortality rate of 7.4 deaths per 1,000 inhabitants. Since 2010, the crude net
imigration rate has ranged from below zero to up to four immigrants per 1,000
iinhabitants per year.[285]
i
iArgentina is in the midst of a demographic transition to an older and
islower-growing population. The proportion of people under 15 is 25.6%, a
ilittle below the world average of 28%, and the proportion of people 65 and
iolder is relatively high at 10.8%. In Latin America this is second only to
iUruguay and well above the world average, which is currently 7%. Argentina
ihas
ia comparatively low infant mortality rate. Its birth rate of 2.3 children per
iwoman is considerably below the high of 7.0 children born per woman in
i1895,[286] though still nearly twice as high as in Spain or Italy, which are
iculturally and demographically similar.[287][288] The median age is 31.9
iyears
iand life expectancy at birth is 77.14 years.[289]
i
iIn 2010, Argentina became the first country in Latin America, the second in
ithe Americas, and the tenth worldwide to legalize same-sex
imarriage.[290][291]
i
iArgentina is considered a country of immigrants.[292][293][294] Argentines
iusually refer to the country as a crisol de razas (crucible of races, or
imelting pot). A 2010 study conducted on 218 individuals by the Argentine
igeneticist Daniel Corach established that the average genetic ancestry of
iArgentines is 79% European (mainly Italian and Spanish), 18% indigenous and
i4.3% African; 63.6% of the tested group had at least one ancestor who was
iIndigenous.[295][296] The majority of Argentines descend from multiple
iEuropean ethnic groups, primarily of Italian and Spanish descent, with over
i25
imillion Argentines (almost 60% of the population) having some partial Italian
iorigins.[297]
i
iArgentina is also home to a notable Asian population, the majority of whom
iare descended from either West Asians (namely Lebanese and Syrians)[298] or
iEast Asians (such as the Chinese,[299] Koreans, and the Japanese).[300] The
ilatter of whom number around 180,000 individuals. The total number of Arab
iArgentines (most of whom are of Lebanese or Syrian origin) is estimated to be
i1.3 to 3.5 million. Many immigrated from various Asian countries to Argentina
iduring the 19th century (especially during the latter half of the century)
iand
ithe first half of the 20th century.[301][302] Most Arab Argentines are
iChristians belonging to the Catholic Church (the Latin Rite church and
iEastern
iRite churches), and Eastern Orthodox churches. A minority are Muslims.
i
iFrom the 1970s, immigration has mostly been coming from Bolivia, Paraguay and
iPeru, with smaller numbers from the Dominican Republic, Ecuador and
iRomania.[303] The Argentine government estimates that 750,000 inhabitants
ilack
iofficial documents and has launched a program[304] to encourage illegal
iimmigrants to declare their status in return for two-year residence visas—so
ifar over 670,000 applications have been processed under the program.[305]
i
iThe de facto[N] official language is Spanish, spoken by almost all
iArgentines.[306] The country is the largest Spanish-speaking society that
iuniversally employs voseo, the use of the pronoun vos instead of tú ("you"),
iwhich imposes the use of alternative verb forms as well. Owing to the
iextensive Argentine geography, Spanish has a strong variation among regions,
ialthough the prevalent dialect is Rioplatense, primarily spoken in the
iPampean
iand Patagonian regions and accented similarly to the Neapolitan
ilanguage.[307]
iItalian and other European immigrants influenced Lunfardo—the regional
islang—permeating the vernacular vocabulary of other Latin American countries
ias well.
i
iThere are several second-languages in widespread use among the Argentine
ipopulation: English taught since elementary school; 42.3% of Argentines claim
ito speak it, with 15.4% of them claiming to have a high level of language
icomprehension.[citation needed]); Italian (by 1.5 million people);[306][O]
iArabic (specially its Northern Levantine dialect, by one million
ipeople);[306]
iStandard German (by 200,000 people);[306][P] Guaraní (by 200,000 people,[306]
imostly in Corrientes and Misiones);[3] Catalan (by 174,000 people);[306]
iQuechua (by 65,000 people, mostly in the Northwest);[306] Wichí (by 53,700
ipeople, mainly in Chaco[306] where, along with Kom and Moqoit, it is official
ide jure);[5] Vlax Romani (by 52,000 people);[306] Albanian (by 40,000
ipeople);[308] Japanese (by 32,000 people);[306] Aymara (by 30,000 people,
imostly in the Northwest);[306] Ukrainian (by 27,000 people);[306]
i
iChristianity is the largest religion in Argentina. The Constitution
iguarantees freedom of religion.[309] Although it enforces neither an official
inor a state faith,[310] it gives Roman Catholicism a preferential
istatus.[311][Q]
i
iAccording to a 2008 CONICET poll, Argentines were 76.5% Catholic, 11.3%
iAgnostics and Atheists, 9% Evangelical Protestants, 1.2% Jehovah's Witnesses,
iand 0.9% Mormons, while 1.2% followed other religions, including Islam,
iJudaism and Buddhism.[313] These figures appear to have changed quite
isignificantly in recent years: data recorded in 2017 indicated that Catholics
imade up 66% of the population, indicating a drop of 10.5% in nine years, and
ithe nonreligious in the country standing at 21% of the population, indicating
ian almost doubling over the same period.[314]
i
iThe country is home to both one of the largest Muslim[312] and largest Jewish
icommunities in Latin America, the latter being the seventh most populous in
ithe world.[315] Argentina is a member of the International Holocaust
iRemembrance Alliance.[312]
i
iArgentines show high individualization and de-institutionalization of
ireligious beliefs;[316] 23.8% claim to always attend religious services;
i49.1%
iseldom do and 26.8% never do.[317]
i
iOn 13 March 2013, Argentine Jorge Mario Bergoglio, the Cardinal Archbishop of
iBuenos Aires, was elected Bishop of Rome and Supreme Pontiff of the Catholic
iChurch. He took the name "Francis", and he became the first Pope from either
ithe Americas or from the Southern Hemisphere; he is the first Pope born
ioutside of Europe since the election of Pope Gregory III (who was Syrian) in
i741.[318]
i
iHealth care is provided through a combination of employer and labour
iunion-sponsored plans (Obras Sociales), government insurance plans, public
ihospitals and clinics and through private health insurance plans. Health care
icooperatives number over 300 (of which 200 are related to labour unions) and
iprovide health care for half the population; the national INSSJP (popularly
iknown as PAMI) covers nearly all of the five million senior citizens.[319]
i
iThere are more than 153,000 hospital beds, 121,000 physicians and 37,000
identists (ratios comparable to developed nations).[320][321] The relatively
ihigh access to medical care has historically resulted in mortality patterns
iand trends similar to developed nations': from 1953 to 2005, deaths from
icardiovascular disease increased from 20% to 23% of the total, those from
itumors from 14% to 20%, respiratory problems from 7% to 14%, digestive
imaladies (non-infectious) from 7% to 11%, strokes a steady 7%, injuries, 6%,
iand infectious diseases, 4%. Causes related to senility led to many of the
irest. Infant deaths have fallen from 19% of all deaths in 1953 to 3% in
i2005.[320][322]
i
iThe availability of health care has also reduced infant mortality from 70 per
i1000 live births in 1948[323] to 12.1 in 2009[320] and raised life expectancy
iat birth from 60 years to 76.[323] Though these figures compare favorably
iwith
iglobal averages, they fall short of levels in developed nations and in 2006,
iArgentina ranked fourth in Latin America.[321]
i
iThe Argentine education system consists of four levels.[324] An initial level
ifor children between 45 days to 5 years old, with the last two years[325]
ibeing compulsory. An elementary or lower school mandatory level lasting 6 or
i7
iyears.[R] In 2010[update] the literacy rate was 98.07%.[326] A secondary or
ihigh school mandatory level lasting 5 or 6 years.[R] In 2010[update] 38.5% of
ipeople over age 20 had completed secondary school.[327] A higher level,
idivided in tertiary, university and post-graduate sub-levels. in 2013[update]
ithere were 47 national public universities across the country, as well as 46
iprivate ones.[328]
i
iIn 2010[update] 7.1% of people over age 20 had graduated from
iuniversity.[327] The public universities of Buenos Aires, Córdoba, La Plata,
iRosario, and the National Technological University are some of the most
iimportant. The Argentine state guarantees universal, secular and
ifree-of-charge public education for all levels.[S] Responsibility for
ieducational supervision is organized at the federal and individual provincial
istates. In the last decades the role of the private sector has grown across
iall educational stages.
i
iArgentina is highly urbanized, with 92% of its population living in
icities:[329] the ten largest metropolitan areas account for half of the
ipopulation. About 3 million people live in the city of Buenos Aires, and
iincluding the Greater Buenos Aires metropolitan area it totals around 13
imillion, making it one of the largest urban areas in the world.[330] The
imetropolitan areas of Córdoba and Rosario have around 1.3 million inhabitants
ieach.[330] Mendoza, San Miguel de Tucumán, La Plata, Mar del Plata, Salta and
iSanta Fe have at least half a million people each.[330]
i
iThe population is unequally distributed: about 60% live in the Pampas region
i(21% of the total area), including 15 million people in Buenos Aires
iprovince.
iThe provinces of Córdoba and Santa Fe, and the city of Buenos Aires have 3
imillion each. Seven other provinces have over one million people each:
iMendoza, Tucumán, Entre Ríos, Salta, Chaco, Corrientes and Misiones. With
i64.3
iinhabitants per square kilometre (167/sq mi), Tucumán is the only Argentine
iprovince more densely populated than the world average; by contrast, the
isouthern province of Santa Cruz has around 1.1/km2 (2.8/sq mi).[331]
i
i===== Culture =====
i
iArgentina is a multicultural country with significant European influences.
iModern Argentine culture has been largely influenced by Italian, Spanish and
iother European immigration from France, Russia, United Kingdom, among others.
iIts cities are largely characterized by both the prevalence of people of
iEuropean descent, and of conscious imitation of American and European styles
iin fashion, architecture and design.[333] Museums, cinemas, and galleries are
iabundant in all the large urban centres, as well as traditional
iestablishments
isuch as literary bars, or bars offering live music of a variety of genres
ialthough there are lesser elements of Amerindian and African influences,
iparticularly in the fields of music and art. [334] The other big influence is
ithe gauchos and their traditional country lifestyle of self-reliance.[335]
iFinally, indigenous American traditions have been absorbed into the general
icultural milieu. Argentine writer Ernesto Sabato has reflected on the nature
iof the culture of Argentina as follows:
i
iWith the primitive Hispanic American reality fractured in La Plata Basin due
ito immigration, its inhabitants have come to be somewhat dual with all the
idangers but also with all the advantages of that condition: because of our
iEuropean roots, we deeply link the nation with the enduring values of the Old
iWorld; because of our condition of Americans we link ourselves to the rest of
ithe continent, through the folklore of the interior and the old Castilian
ithat
iunifies us, feeling somehow the vocation of the Patria Grande San Martín and
iBolívar once imagined.
i
iAlthough Argentina's rich literary history began around 1550,[337] it reached
ifull independence with Esteban Echeverría's El Matadero, a romantic landmark
ithat played a significant role in the development of 19th century's Argentine
inarrative,[338] split by the ideological divide between the popular,
ifederalist epic of José Hernández' Martín Fierro and the elitist and cultured
idiscourse of Sarmiento's masterpiece, Facundo.[339]
i
iThe Modernist movement advanced into the 20th century including exponents
isuch as Leopoldo Lugones and poet Alfonsina Storni;[340] it was followed by
iVanguardism, with Ricardo Güiraldes's Don Segundo Sombra as an important
ireference.[341]
i
iJorge Luis Borges, Argentina's most acclaimed writer and one of the foremost
ifigures in the history of literature,[342] found new ways of looking at the
imodern world in metaphor and philosophical debate and his influence has
iextended to authors all over the globe. Short stories such as Ficciones and
iThe Aleph are among his most famous works. He was a friend and collaborator
iof
iAdolfo Bioy Casares, who wrote one of the most praised science fiction
inovels,
iThe Invention of Morel.[343] Julio Cortázar, one of the leading members of
ithe
iLatin American Boom and a major name in 20th century literature,[344]
iinfluenced an entire generation of writers in the Americas and Europe.[345]
i
iA remarkable episode in Argentine literary history is the social and
iliterarial dialectica between the so-called Florida Group, named this way
ibecause its members used to meet together at the Richmond Cafeteria at
iFlorida
istreet and published in the Martin Fierro magazine, like Jorge Luis Borges,
iLeopoldo Marechal, Antonio Berni (artist), among others; versus the Boedo
iGroup of Roberto Arlt, Cesar Tiempo, Homero Manzi (tango composer), that used
ito meet at the Japanese Cafe and published their works with the Editorial
iClaridad, with both the cafe and the publisher located at Boedo Avenue.
i
iOther highly regarded Argentine writers, poets and essayists include
iEstanislao del Campo, Eugenio Cambaceres, Pedro Bonifacio Palacios, Hugo
iWast,
iBenito Lynch, Enrique Banchs, Oliverio Girondo, Ezequiel Martínez Estrada,
iVictoria Ocampo, Leopoldo Marechal, Silvina Ocampo, Roberto Arlt, Eduardo
iMallea, Manuel Mujica Láinez, Ernesto Sábato, Silvina Bullrich, Rodolfo
iWalsh,
iMaría Elena Walsh, Tomás Eloy Martínez, Manuel Puig, Alejandra Pizarnik, and
iOsvaldo Soriano.[346]
i
iTango, a Rioplatense musical genre with European and African influences,[347]
iis one of Argentina's international cultural symbols.[348] The golden age of
itango (1930 to mid-1950s) mirrored that of jazz and swing in the United
iStates, featuring large orchestras like those of Osvaldo Pugliese, Aníbal
iTroilo, Francisco Canaro, Julio de Caro and Juan d'Arienzo.[349] After 1955,
ivirtuoso Astor Piazzolla popularized Nuevo tango, a subtler and more
iintellectual trend for the genre.[349] Tango enjoys worldwide popularity
inowadays with groups like Gotan Project, Bajofondo and Tanghetto.
i
iArgentina developed strong classical music and dance scenes that gave rise to
irenowned artists such as Alberto Ginastera, composer; Alberto Lysy,
iviolinist;
iMartha Argerich and Eduardo Delgado, pianists; Daniel Barenboim, pianist and
isymphonic orchestra director; José Cura and Marcelo Álvarez, tenors; and to
iballet dancers Jorge Donn, José Neglia, Norma Fontenla, Maximiliano Guerra,
iPaloma Herrera, Marianela Núñez, Iñaki Urlezaga and Julio Bocca.[349]
i
iA national Argentine folk style emerged in the 1930s from dozens of regional
imusical genres and went on to influence the entirety of Latin American music.
iSome of its interpreters, like Atahualpa Yupanqui and Mercedes Sosa, achieved
iworldwide acclaim. The romantic ballad genre included singers of
iinternational
ifame such as Sandro de América. Tenor saxophonist Leandro "Gato" Barbieri and
icomposer and big band conductor Lalo Schifrin are among the most
iinternationally successful Argentine jazz musicians.
i
iArgentine rock developed as a distinct musical style in the mid-1960s, when
iBuenos Aires and Rosario became cradles of aspiring musicians. Founding bands
ilike Los Gatos, Sui Generis, Almendra and Manal were followed by Seru Giran,
iLos Abuelos de la Nada, Soda Stereo and Patricio Rey y sus Redonditos de
iRicota, with prominent artists including Gustavo Cerati, Litto Nebbia, Andrés
iCalamaro, Luis Alberto Spinetta, Charly García, Fito Páez and León
iGieco.[349]
i
iA dance and a musical genre popular at present is Cachengue, a subgenre of
iArgentine cumbia and reggaeton spreading in popularity in nearby countries
isuch as Uruguay, Chile, Paraguay, and Bolivia.[350]
i
iBuenos Aires is one of the great theatre capitals of the world,[353] with a
iscene of international caliber centered on Corrientes Avenue, "the street
ithat
inever sleeps", sometimes referred to as an intellectual Broadway in Buenos
iAires.[354] Teatro Colón is a global landmark for opera and classical
iperformances; its acoustics are considered among the world's top
ifive.[355][T]
i
iThe Argentine film industry has historically been one of the three most
ideveloped in Latin American cinema, along with those produced in Mexico and
iBrazil.[356][357] Started in 1896; by the early 1930s it had already become
iLatin America's leading film producer, a place it kept until the early
i1950s.[358] The world's first animated feature films were made and released
iin
iArgentina, by cartoonist Quirino Cristiani, in 1917 and 1918.[359]
i
iArgentine films have achieved worldwide recognition: the country has won two
iAcademy Awards for Best Foreign Language Film, for The Official Story (1985)
iand The Secret in Their Eyes (2009). In addition, Argentine composers Luis
iEnrique Bacalov and Gustavo Santaolalla have been honored with Academy Awards
ifor Best Original Score, and Armando Bó and Nicolás Giacobone shared in the
iAcademy Award for Best Original Screenplay for 2014. Also, the Argentine
iFrench actress Bérénice Bejo received a nomination for the Academy Award for
iBest Supporting Actress in 2011 and won the César Award for Best Actress and
iwon the Best Actress award in the Cannes Film Festival for her role in the
ifilm The Past.[360] Argentina also has won seventeen Goya Awards for Best
iSpanish Language Foreign Film, being by far the most awarded country in Latin
iAmerica with twenty-four nominations. Many other Argentine films also have
ibeen acclaimed by international critique. In 2013[update] about 100
ifull-length motion pictures were being created annually.[361]
i
iSome of the best-known Argentine painters are Cándido López and Florencio
iMolina Campos (Naïve style); Ernesto de la Cárcova and Eduardo Sívori
i(Realism); Fernando Fader (Impressionism); Pío Collivadino, Atilio Malinverno
iand Cesáreo Bernaldo de Quirós (Postimpressionism); Emilio Pettoruti
i(Cubism);
iJulio Barragán (Concretism and Cubism) Antonio Berni (Neofigurativism);
iRoberto Aizenberg and Xul Solar (Surrealism); Gyula Košice (Constructivism);
iEduardo Mac Entyre (Generative art); Luis Seoane, Carlos Torrallardona, Luis
iAquino, Alfredo Gramajo Gutiérrez (Modernism); Lucio Fontana (Spatialism);
iTomás Maldonado, Guillermo Kuitca (Abstract art); León Ferrari, Marta Minujín
i(Conceptual art); Gustavo Cabral (Fantasy art), and Fabián Pérez
i(Neoemotionalism).[vague]
i
iIn 1946 Gyula Košice and others created The Madí Movement in Argentina, which
ithen spread to Europe and the United States, where it had a significant
iimpact.[362] Tomás Maldonado was one of the main theorists of the Ulm Model
iof
idesign education, still highly influential globally. Other Argentine artists
iof worldwide fame include Adolfo Bellocq, whose lithographs have been
iinfluential since the 1920s, and Benito Quinquela Martín, the quintessential
iport painter, inspired by the immigrant-bound La Boca neighbourhood.
iInternationally laureate sculptors Erminio Blotta, Lola Mora and Rogelio
iYrurtia authored many of the classical evocative monuments of the Argentine
icityscape.[citation needed]
i
iThe colonization brought the Spanish Baroque architecture, which can still be
iappreciated in its simpler Rioplatense style in the reduction of San Ignacio
iMiní, the Cathedral of Córdoba, and the Cabildo of Luján. Italian and French
iinfluences increased at the beginning of the 19th century with strong
ieclectic
iovertones that gave the local architecture a unique feeling.[363]
i
iThe print media industry is highly developed in Argentina, with more than two
ihundred newspapers. The major national ones include Clarín (centrist, Latin
iAmerica's best-seller and the second most widely circulated in the
iSpanish-speaking world), La Nación (centre-right, published since 1870),
iPágina/12 (leftist, founded in 1987), La Voz del Interior (centre, founded in
i1904),[364] and the Argentinisches Tageblatt (German weekly, liberal,
ipublished since 1878)[365]
i
iArgentina began the world's first regular radio broadcasting on 27 August
i1920, when Richard Wagner's Parsifal was aired by a team of medical students
iled by Enrique Telémaco Susini in Buenos Aires' Teatro Coliseo.[366] By
i2002[update] there were 260 AM and 1150 FM registered radio stations in the
icountry.[367]
i
iThe Argentine television industry is large, diverse and popular across Latin
iAmerica, with many productions and TV formats having been exported abroad.
iSince 1999 Argentines enjoy the highest availability of cable and satellite
itelevision in Latin America,[368] as of 2014[update] totaling 87.4% of the
icountry's households, a rate similar to those in the United States, Canada
iand
iEurope.[369]
i
iBy 2011[update] Argentina also had the highest coverage of networked
itelecommunications among Latin American powers: about 67% of its population
ihad internet access and 137.2%, mobile phone subscriptions.[370]
i
iBesides many of the pasta, sausage and dessert dishes common to continental
iEurope, Argentines enjoy a wide variety of Indigenous and Criollo creations,
iincluding empanadas (a small stuffed pastry), locro (a mixture of corn,
ibeans,
imeat, bacon, onion, and gourd), humita and mate.[371]
i
iThe country has the highest consumption of red meat in the world,[372]
itraditionally prepared as asado, the Argentine barbecue. It is made with
ivarious types of meats, often including chorizo, sweetbread, chitterlings,
iand
iblood sausage.[373]
i
iCommon desserts include facturas (Viennese-style pastry), cakes and pancakes
ifilled with dulce de leche (a sort of milk caramel jam), alfajores
i(shortbread
icookies sandwiched together with chocolate, dulce de leche or a fruit paste),
iand tortas fritas (fried cakes)[374]
i
iArgentine wine, one of the world's finest,[375] is an integral part of the
ilocal menu. Malbec, Torrontés, Cabernet Sauvignon, Syrah and Chardonnay are
isome of the most sought-after varieties.[376]
i
iPato is the national sport,[377] an ancient horseback game locally originated
iin the early 1600s and predecessor of horseball.[378][379] The most popular
isport is football. Along with Brazil and France, the men's national team is
ithe only one to have won the most important international triplet: World Cup,
iConfederations Cup, and the Olympic Gold Medal. It has also won 15 Copas
iAmérica, 7 Pan American Gold Medals and many other trophies.[380] Alfredo Di
iStéfano, Diego Maradona and Lionel Messi are among the best players in the
igame's history.[381]
i
iThe country's women's field hockey team Las Leonas, is one of the world's
imost successful with four Olympic medals, two World Cups, a World League and
iseven Champions Trophy.[382] Luciana Aymar is recognized as the best female
iplayer in the history of the sport,[383] being the only player to have
ireceived the FIH Player of the Year Award eight times.[384]
i
iBasketball is a very popular sport. The men's national team is the only one
iin the FIBA Americas zone that has won the quintuplet crown: World
iChampionship, Olympic Gold Medal, Diamond Ball, Americas Championship, and
iPan
iAmerican Gold Medal. It has also conquered 13 South American Championships,
iand many other tournaments.[385] Emanuel Ginóbili, Luis Scola, Andrés
iNocioni,
iFabricio Oberto, Pablo Prigioni, Carlos Delfino and Juan Ignacio Sánchez are
ia
ifew of the country's most acclaimed players, all of them part of the
iNBA.[382]
iArgentina hosted the Basketball World Cup in 1950 and 1990.
i
iRugby is another popular sport in Argentina. As of 2017[update] the men's
inational team, known as 'Los Pumas' has competed at the Rugby World Cup each
itime it has been held, achieving their highest ever result in 2007 when they
icame third. Since 2012 the Los Pumas have competed against Australia, New
iZealand & South Africa in The Rugby Championship, the premier international
iRugby competition in the Southern Hemisphere. Since 2009 the secondary men's
inational team known as the 'Jaguares' has competed against the US, Canada,
iand
iUruguay first teams in the Americas Rugby Championship, which Los Jaguares
ihave won six out of eight times it has taken place.
i
iArgentina has produced some of the most formidable champions for boxing,
iincluding Carlos Monzón, the best middleweight in history;[386] Pascual
iPérez,
ione of the most decorated flyweight boxers of all times; Horacio Accavallo,
ithe former WBA and WBC world flyweight champion; Víctor Galíndez, as of
i2009[update] record holder for consecutive world light heavyweight title
idefenses and Nicolino Locche, nicknamed "The Untouchable" for his masterful
idefense; they are all inductees into the International Boxing Hall of
iFame.[387]
i
iTennis has been quite popular among people of all ages. Guillermo Vilas is
ithe greatest Latin American player of the Open Era,[388] while Gabriela
iSabatini is the most accomplished Argentine female player of all time—having
ireached number 3 in the WTA ranking,[389] are both inductees into the
iInternational Tennis Hall of Fame.[390] Argentina has won the World Team Cup
ifour times, in 1980, 2002, 2007 and 2010 and has reached the semifinals of
ithe
iDavis Cup 7 times in the last 10 years, losing the finals against Russia in
i2006 and Spain in 2008 and 2011; the Argentine team also played the final in
i1981, where they lost against the United States. The national squad won the
i2016 Davis Cup.
i
iArgentina reigns undisputed in polo, having won more international
ichampionships than any other country and been seldom beaten since the
i1930s.[391] The Argentine Polo Championship is the sport's most important
iinternational team trophy. The country is home to most of the world's top
iplayers, among them Adolfo Cambiaso, the best in Polo history.[392]
i
iHistorically, Argentina has had a strong showing within auto racing. Juan
iManuel Fangio was five times Formula One world champion under four different
iteams, winning 102 of his 184 international races, and is widely ranked as
ithe
igreatest driver of all time.[393] Other distinguished racers were Oscar
iAlfredo Gálvez, Juan Gálvez, José Froilán González and Carlos Reutemann.[394]
i
i===== See also =====
i
i===== Notes =====
i
i===== References =====
i
i===== Bibliography =====
i
i===== External links =====
i
iWorld portal
i
i
i
i  ------------- SOURCE ----------------
i
iURL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Argentina
i
iLICENSE: Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike
i
i=========================================
i
i
i$
Bt:Argentina - Wikipedia	/x/w/g/https_58__47__47_en_46_wikipedia_46_org_47_wiki_47_Argentina	texopher.com	70
