i
1[?] Read Details	/x/w/gd/https_58__47__47_en_46_wikipedia_46_org_47_wiki_47_Meghan_44__95_Duchess_95_of_95_Sussex	texopher.com	70
i
i===== Contents =====
i
iPrincess Meghan, Duchess of Sussex (/ˈmɛɡən/; born Rachel Meghan Markle;
iAugust 4, 1981) is an American member of the British royal family and former
iactress. She is married to Prince Harry, Duke of Sussex, the younger son of
iKing Charles III.
i
iThe Princess was born and raised in Los Angeles, California. Her acting
icareer began at Northwestern University. She played the part of Rachel Zane
ifor seven seasons (2011–2018) in the American TV legal drama Suits. She also
ideveloped a social media presence, which included The Tig (2014–2017), a
ilifestyle blog. During The Tig period, Meghan became involved in charity work
ifocused primarily on women's issues and social justice. She was married to
iAmerican film producer Trevor Engelson from 2011 until their divorce in 2014.
i
iThe Princess retired from acting upon her marriage to Prince Harry in 2018
iand became known as the Duchess of Sussex. They have two children, Prince
iArchie and Princess Lilibet. In January 2020, the couple stepped down as
iworking royals and later settled in California. In October 2020, they
ilaunched
iArchewell Inc., an American public organization that focuses on non-profit
iactivities and creative media ventures. In the following years, she released
ia
ipicture book for children, The Bench, and launched a Spotify podcast,
iArchetypes. Meghan and Harry filmed an interview with Oprah Winfrey, which
iwas
ibroadcast in March 2021, and a Netflix docuseries, Harry & Meghan, which was
ireleased in December 2022.
i
i===== Early life and education =====
i
iRachel Meghan Markle was born on August 4, 1981, at West Park Hospital in
iCanoga Park, Los Angeles, California, to Doria Ragland (born 1956), a make-up
iartist, and Thomas Markle Sr. (born 1944), an Emmy Award winning television
ilighting director and director of photography.[1][2] She identifies as mixed
irace, often answering questions about her background with "My dad is
iCaucasian
iand my mom is African American. I'm half black and half white."[3] Her
iparents
iseparated when she was two years old and divorced four years later.[4][5][6]
iShe has a close relationship with her mother.[7][8] Thomas Markle Sr. worked
ias a director of photography and lighting for General Hospital and Married...
iwith Children, and Meghan occasionally visited the set of Married... with
iChildren as a child.[9][10] She has been estranged from her father and
ipaternal half-siblings, Samantha Markle and Thomas Markle Jr.[11][12]
i
iGrowing up in Los Angeles,[13] Markle attended Hollywood Little Red
iSchoolhouse.[14][15] Both her parents contributed to raising her until the
iage
iof 9, after which her father was left in charge of caring for her as her
imother pursued a career.[16] At age 11, she and her classmates wrote to
iProcter & Gamble to gender-neutralize a dishwashing soap commercial on
inational television.[17] She was raised as a Protestant[18] but graduated
ifrom
iL.A.'s Immaculate Heart High School, an all-girl Catholic school.[19] Markle
itook part in plays and musicals at the school, where her father helped with
ilighting.[20] During her teenage years, she worked at a local frozen yogurt
ishop and later as a waitress and babysitter.[21][22] She also volunteered at
ia
isoup kitchen in Skid Row, Los Angeles.[23][24] In 1999, she was admitted to
iNorthwestern University (NU) in Evanston, Illinois, where she joined Kappa
iKappa Gamma sorority.[25][26] With other members of Kappa Kappa Gamma, Markle
idid volunteer work with the Glass Slipper Project. After her junior year, she
isecured an internship as a junior press officer at the American embassy in
iBuenos Aires, with the help of her uncle Michael Markle,[27] and considered a
ipolitical career.[28][29] However, she did not score high enough in the
iForeign Service Officer Test to proceed further with the US State
iDepartment[30] and returned to NU. She also attended a study abroad program
iin
iMadrid.[26] In 2003, Markle earned her bachelor's degree with a double major
iin theater and international studies from Northwestern's School of
iCommunication.[28][30]
i
i===== Acting career =====
i
iAccording to Markle, she had some difficulty getting roles early in her
icareer due to being "ethnically ambiguous" because "I wasn't black enough for
ithe black roles and I wasn't white enough for the white ones."[31] To support
iherself between acting jobs, she worked as a freelance calligrapher and
itaught
ibookbinding.[9][32] Her first on-screen appearance was a small role as a
inurse
iin an episode of the daytime soap opera General Hospital,[33][34] a show for
iwhich her father served as a lighting director.[35] Markle had small guest
iroles on the television shows Century City (2004), The War at Home (2006) and
iCSI: NY (2006).[33] For her role in Century City, she told the casting
idirectors that she was a SAG-AFTRA member when she was not, but after being
icast, the employers were obliged to help her join the union according to the
iTaft–Hartley Act.[36] Markle also did several contract acting and modeling
ijobs. Between 2006 and 2007, she worked as a "briefcase girl" on 34 episodes
iof the US version of the game show Deal or No Deal.[9] She appeared in Fox's
iseries Fringe as Junior Agent Amy Jessup in the first two episodes of its
isecond season.[37]
i
iMarkle appeared in small roles in the films Get Him to the Greek, Remember Me
i(produced by her then-partner Trevor Engelson) and The Candidate in 2010 and
ithe film Horrible Bosses in 2011.[38] She was paid $187,000 for her role in
iRemember Me and $171,429 for her role in the short film The Candidate.[39] In
iJuly 2011, she joined the cast of the USA Network show Suits through to late
i2017 and the seventh season. Her character, Rachel Zane, began as a paralegal
iand eventually became an attorney.[40] While working on Suits, she lived for
inine months each year in Toronto.[41][42] Fortune magazine estimated that she
iwas paid $50,000 per episode, amounting to an equivalent annual salary of
i$450,000.[43]
i
i===== Personal life =====
i
iMarkle and American film producer Trevor Engelson began dating in
i2004.[44][45] They were married in Ocho Rios, Jamaica on August 16, 2011.[46]
iThey separated in July 2013 and concluded a no-fault divorce in February
i2014,[47] citing irreconcilable differences.[48] Markle's subsequent live-in
irelationship with Canadian celebrity chef and restaurateur Cory Vitiello
iended
iin May 2016 after almost two years.[49]
i
iIn mid-2016,[50] Markle began a relationship with Prince Harry, a grandson of
iQueen Elizabeth II.[51][52] According to the couple, they first connected
iwith
ieach other via Instagram,[53] and they have also said that they were set up
ion
ia blind date by a mutual friend in July 2016.[50] On November 8, eight days
iafter the relationship was made public by the press, the prince directed his
icommunications secretary to release a statement on his behalf to express
ipersonal concern about pejorative and false comments made about his
igirlfriend
iby mainstream media and internet trolls.[54][55] Later, in a letter to a
iBritish media regulator, Markle's representatives complained about harassment
ifrom journalists.[56] In September 2017, Markle and Prince Harry appeared
itogether in public in Toronto at the Invictus Games, of which Harry is
ifounding patron.[57][58]
i
iMeghan Markle's engagement to Prince Harry was announced on November 27,
i2017, by Harry's father Charles (then the Prince of Wales).[59] The
iannouncement was greeted with enthusiasm by the British media and prompted
igenerally positive comments about a mixed-race person as a member of the
iroyal
ifamily,[60] especially in regard to Commonwealth countries.[61] Markle
iannounced that she would retire from acting[62][63] and her intention to
ibecome a British citizen.[64]
i
iIn preparation for the wedding, the Archbishop of Canterbury, Justin Welby,
ibaptised Markle and confirmed her in the Church of England on March 6,
i2018.[65] The private ceremony, performed with water from the River Jordan,
itook place in the Chapel Royal at St James's Palace.[65] The marriage
iceremony
iwas held on May 19 at St George's Chapel, Windsor Castle.[66] Her wedding
idress was designed by Clare Waight Keller.[67] Markle later revealed that
ithere was a private exchange of vows three days earlier, with the Archbishop
iof Canterbury in the couple's garden.[68] However, this private exchange of
ivows was not a legally recognized marriage.[69][70]
i
iAfter the wedding, the Duke and Duchess lived at Nottingham Cottage within
ithe grounds of Kensington Palace in London.[71] In May 2018, it was reported
ithat they had signed a two-year lease on Westfield Large, located on the
iGreat
iTew Estate in the Cotswolds.[72] They gave up the lease after photos of the
ihouse and its interior were published by a paparazzi agency.[72] The couple
iconsidered settling at the 21-bedroom Apartment 1 within the grounds of
iKensington Palace,[73][74] but moved to Frogmore Cottage in the Home Park of
iWindsor Castle instead.[75][76] The Crown Estate refurbished the cottage at a
icost of £2.4 million, paid out of the Sovereign Grant, with the Duke later
ireimbursing expenses beyond restoration and ordinary maintenance, a part of
iwhich was offset against rental payments that were due at the time.[77][78]
iMeghan gave birth to a son, Archie, on May 6, 2019.[79] The Duke and Duchess
iof Sussex's office moved to Buckingham Palace and officially closed on March
i31, 2020, when the Sussexes withdrew from undertaking official royal
iengagements.[80][81] After some months in Canada and the United States, in
iJune 2020, the couple bought a house on the former estate of Riven Rock,
iMontecito, California.[82][83] The next month, Meghan suffered a
imiscarriage.[84] She gave birth to a daughter, Lilibet, on June 4, 2021.[85]
iThe Duke and Duchess own a Labrador named Pula and two Beagles named Guy and
iMamma Mia.[86][87] Meghan previously owned a Labrador-German Shepherd cross
inamed Bogart.[88]
i
iMarkle was politically vocal before marrying Prince Harry. At age 9, she and
iher friends reportedly campaigned against the Gulf War.[89] Decades later,
ishe
ibacked Hillary Clinton during the 2016 United States presidential election
iand
ipublicly denounced the opponent and eventual winner, Donald Trump. In the
isame
iyear, when the referendum on the United Kingdom's membership of the European
iUnion resulted in favor of Brexit, Markle expressed her disappointment on
iInstagram.[90] In 2017, Markle recommended the book Who Rules the World? by
ileft-wing intellectual Noam Chomsky on her Instagram account.[91]
i
iIn July 2018, Irish Senator Catherine Noone tweeted that the Duchess was
i"pleased to see the result" of the Irish referendum on legalizing abortion.
iMeghan received criticism for potentially breaching the protocol that
iprohibits royals from interfering in politics;[92] Noone deleted her tweet
iand
iemphasized that her statement was misleading and "the Duchess was not in any
iway political".[92]
i
iAfter she returned to the United States and as an eligible voter, she
ireleased a video with her husband encouraging others to register for the 2020
iUnited States presidential election on National Voter Registration Day. Some
imedia outlets took it as an implicit endorsement of the Democratic candidate,
iJoe Biden, which prompted then-President Trump to dismiss their messaging at
ia
ipress conference.[93] In October 2021, she penned an open letter to Senate
iMajority Leader Chuck Schumer and House Speaker Nancy Pelosi, advocating for
ipaid leave for parents.[94] Her remarks were met by backlash from Republican
irepresentatives Jason Smith and Lisa McClain, who found her statement "out of
itouch" and criticized her interference with American politics while utilizing
iher British royal titles.[95] Meghan has reportedly lobbied senators from
iboth
iparties on the issue of paid family leave, including Democratic senators
iPatty
iMurray and Kirsten Gillibrand, as well as Republican senators Shelley Moore
iCapito and Susan Collins.[96][97] She has also publicly spoken in support of
ifederal voting protections.[98]
i
iIn February 2022, she voiced her support for the Supreme Court nomination of
iKetanji Brown Jackson.[99] In June 2022, she publicly supported Moms Demand
iAction, an organization which campaigns for safer gun laws in the US.[100] In
ithe same month, in an interview with Jessica Yellin for Vogue, Meghan
icriticized the Supreme Court of the United States's decision that abortion is
inot a protected constitutional right and voiced her support for the proposed
iEqual Rights Amendment.[101]
i
i===== Public life =====
i
iAfter becoming engaged, Markle's first official public appearance with Prince
iHarry was at a World AIDS Day walkabout in Nottingham on December 1,
i2017.[102][103] On March 12, the 2018 Commonwealth Day service at Westminster
iAbbey was the first royal event she attended with the Queen.[104] On March
i23,
iHarry and Meghan made an unannounced day visit to Northern Ireland.[105] In
itotal, Markle attended 26 public engagements prior to the wedding.[106]
iMeghan's first official engagement after marriage was on May 22, when she and
iher husband attended a garden party celebrating the charity work of King
iCharles III (then the Prince of Wales).[107]
i
iIn July 2018, Meghan's first official trip abroad as a royal was to Dublin,
iIreland, alongside Harry.[108][109] In October 2018, the Duke and Duchess
itraveled to Sydney, Australia for the 2018 Invictus Games.[110] This formed
ipart of a Pacific tour that included Australia, Fiji, Tonga and New
iZealand.[111][112] As representatives of the Queen, the couple were greeted
iwarmly by crowds in Sydney, and the announcement of Meghan's pregnancy hours
iafter their arrival delighted the public and media.[112][113] During their
ivisit to Morocco in February 2019, the Duke and Duchess focused on projects
icentered on "women's empowerment, girls' education, inclusivity and
iencouragement of social entrepreneurship".[114] Meghan also participated in
iher husband's work as youth ambassador to the Commonwealth, which included
ioverseas tours.[115][116]
i
iAs part of establishing a separate office from Kensington Palace in 2019, the
iDuke and Duchess created an Instagram social media account, which broke the
irecord for the fastest account at the time to reach a million followers.[117]
iIn July 2019, the Duchess's security team were criticized for creating an
iempty zone of about 40 seats around her at Wimbledon where she was watching a
imatch between Serena Williams and Kaja Juvan.[118] In August 2019, Meghan and
iher husband were criticized by environmental campaigners for using private
ijets regularly when taking their personal trips abroad, which would leave
imore
icarbon footprint per person compared to commercial planes. The criticism was
iin line with similar criticism faced by the royal family in June 2019, after
iit was claimed that they "had doubled [their] carbon footprint from business
itravel".[119][120]
i
iIn September and October 2019, a Southern African tour included Malawi,
iAngola, South Africa and Botswana. Archie traveled with his parents, making
iit
i"their first official tour as a family".[121] Meghan completed 179
iengagements
iin total in 2018 and 2019.[122]
i
iIn January 2020, Meghan and Harry returned to the UK from a vacation in
iCanada and announced that they were stepping back from their role as senior
imembers of the royal family and would balance their time between the United
iKingdom and North America.[123][124] A statement released by the Palace
iconfirmed that the Duke and Duchess were to cease to undertake royal duties
ias
irepresentatives of the Queen and would therefore no longer receive the
irelevant financial support.[125] The couple would retain their HRH styles but
inot use them.[125] The formal role of the Duke and Duchess was subject to a
itwelve-month review period, ending in March 2021. Meghan's final public solo
iengagement as a senior royal was a visit to Robert Clack School on March 7,
i2020, in Dagenham ahead of International Women's Day.[126] She and Harry
iattended the Commonwealth Day service at Westminster Abbey on March 9, 2020,
iwhich was their last engagement as a couple before they officially stepped
idown on March 31. Two years later, they made their first official appearance
iin the UK in June 2022 while attending the Platinum Jubilee National Service
iof Thanksgiving.[127]
i
iThey visited the UK and Germany in September 2022 for a number of charity
ievents in Manchester and Düsseldorf.[128] On September 8, 2022, while Meghan
iand Harry were in London preparing to attend a charity event, Queen Elizabeth
iII died at Balmoral Castle in Scotland.[129]
i
i===== Further career and investments =====
i
iIn summer 2019, before announcing their decision to step down in January
i2020, Meghan and her husband were involved in talks with Jeffrey Katzenberg,
ithe founder of the now-defunct streaming platform Quibi, over a possible role
iin the service without gaining personal profits, but they eventually decided
iagainst joining the project.[130] In September 2019, it was reported that the
icouple had hired New York-based PR firm Sunshine Sachs, which represented
ithem
iuntil 2022.[131][132][133] The couple has also been associated with Adam
iLilling's Plus Capital, a venture capital fund designed to connect early
istage
icompanies with influencers and investors.[134] In June 2020, they signed with
ithe Harry Walker Agency, owned by media company Endeavor, to conduct paid
ipublic speaking engagements.[135] In September 2020, the Sussexes signed a
iprivate commercial deal with Netflix.[136] In December 2020, it was announced
ithat Meghan had invested in Clevr Blends, a coffee company based in Southern
iCalifornia.[137][138] In the same month, Meghan and Harry signed a multi-year
ideal with Spotify to produce and host their own programs through their audio
iproducing company, Archewell Audio.[139] A holiday special was released by
ithe
icouple on the service in December 2020,[140] while Meghan's podcast, titled
iArchetypes, premiered in August 2022.[141][142] In June 2023, Spotify
icancelled the podcast, which ran for a single season of 12
iepisodes.[143][144]
i
iThe Bench, a picture book written by Meghan, was published in June 2021 by
iRandom House Children's Books. It is based on her perception of the
irelationship between her husband and their son.[145] The book received a
imixed
iresponse; it garnered praise for its illustrations and messaging but was
icriticized for its structure and writing.[146][147][148] On June 17, the book
ireached number one in the children's picture books category of The New York
iTimes Best Seller list.[149] In July 2021, it was announced that Meghan would
iexecutive produce, alongside David Furnish, a Netflix animated series called
iPearl.[150] The series was originally pitched to Netflix in 2018.[151][152]
iPearl would depict the adventures of a 12-year-old girl who is inspired by
iinfluential women from history,[153] but the project was canceled in May
i2022.[154] In the same month, it was reported that Meghan and Harry had
isigned
ia four-book publishing deal including a wellness guide by Meghan and a memoir
iby Harry.[155]
i
iIn October 2021, Meghan and Harry announced their partnership with Ethic, a
isustainable investment firm based in New York City, which also manages the
icouple's investments.[156][157] According to state filings from Delaware,
iwhere the couple's Archewell foundation is registered, Meghan and Harry
iincorporated 11 companies and a trust beginning in early 2020 which include
iOrinoco Publishing LLC and Peca Publishing LLC to hold the rights for their
ibooks as well as Cobblestone Lane LLC and IPHW LLC which are holders of their
ifoundation's logos.[158] Frim Fram Inc., which ran The Tig, had been
iregistered earlier as a new corporation in Delaware in December 2019.[159]
i
iHarry & Meghan, a docuseries about the Sussexes, was produced by Netflix and
ithe couple's Archewell Productions and premiered on December 8, 2022. It is
idirected by Liz Garbus.[160] The series received mixed reviews.[161] In April
i2023, it was announced that she had signed with WME, which would represent
iArchewell as well.[162]
i
i===== Charity work and advocacy =====
i
iMarkle became a counsellor for the international network One Young World in
i2014 and spoke at its 2014 summit in Dublin[164] and attended the 2016
iopening
iceremony in Ottawa.[165] Also in 2014, she toured Spain, Italy, Turkey,
iAfghanistan and England with the United Service Organizations.[166] During
iher
itime in Toronto, she volunteered for the Community Meals Program of St. Felix
iCentre and donated food from the set of Suits.[167][168]
i
iIn 2016, Markle became a global ambassador for World Vision Canada, traveling
ito Rwanda for the Clean Water Campaign.[169][170][31] After a trip to India
ifocused on raising awareness for women's issues, she penned an op-ed for Time
imagazine concerning stigmatization of women in regard to menstrual
ihealth.[171] She has also worked with the United Nations Entity for Gender
iEquality and the Empowerment of Women as an advocate.[169][172] Her speech at
ithe UN Women's 2015 conference as an advocate for political participation and
ileadership contained a number of sentences that were nearly identical to a
i1951 speech by Eleanor Roosevelt.[173][174] In 2017, Markle joined Prince
iHarry in teaming up with the charity Elephants Without Borders to assist with
ithe conservation efforts taking place in Botswana.[175]
i
iIn January 2018, Markle became interested in the Hubb Community Kitchen run
iby survivors of the Grenfell Tower fire. She visited the kitchen regularly
iand
isuggested that the displaced women publish a cookbook to assist in funding
ifor
ithe group.[176] Together: Our Community Cookbook, her first charity project
ias
iDuchess of Sussex, was announced in September.[177] In August 2020, Meghan
iused proceeds from the cookbook to donate £8,000 to the UK charity
iMigrateful,
iwhich supports refugees, asylum seekers and migrants by helping them organize
icookery classes.[178] In March 2021, she donated £10,000 from the proceeds to
ithe UK-based charity Himmah to assist them with stocking the group's food
ibank, provide them with equipment and help the Salaam Shalom Kitchen, the
ionly
iMuslim and Jewish community kitchen in the UK.[179]
i
iIn March 2020, it was announced that Meghan's first post-royal project would
ibe the narration of Disneynature's documentary Elephant, which was released
ion
iApril 3.[180] In support of elephants, Disneynature and the Disney
iConservation Fund would donate to Elephants Without Borders for species
iconservation in Botswana.[181] In June 2020, the couple backed the Stop Hate
ifor Profit campaign and encouraged CEOs of different companies to join the
imovement.[182] In July 2020, she spoke in support of the Black Lives Matter
imovement.[183]
i
iIn April 2021, the couple were announced as campaign chairs for Vax Live: The
iConcert to Reunite the World, an event organized by Global Citizen to
iincrease
iaccess to COVID-19 vaccinations.[184] They also announced their support for a
ivaccine equity fundraiser initiated by the same organization,[185] and penned
ian open letter to the pharmaceutical industry CEOs urging them to address the
ivaccine equity crisis.[186] In July 2021, Meghan and Harry were among people
iwho were selected by UK-based charity Population Matters to receive the
iChange
iChampions Award for their decision to have only two children and help with
imaintaining a smaller and more sustainable population.[187] In August 2021,
ito
imark her 40th birthday, Meghan launched 40x40, a campaign that asks people
iaround the world to spend 40 minutes of their time mentoring women reentering
ithe workforce.[188] In October 2021 and ahead of the 2021 G20 Rome summit,
ithe
icouple penned an open letter together with the Director-General of the World
iHealth Organization Tedros Adhanom, asking the G20 leaders to expedite
iefforts
ifor the global distribution of COVID-19 vaccines.[189]
i
iIn February 2022, the couple were selected to receive NAACP's President's
iAward for their work on causes related to social justice and equity.[190] In
ithe following month, they were among more than a hundred people who signed an
iopen letter published by the People's Vaccine Alliance, asking for free
iglobal
iaccess to COVID-19 vaccines and calling out the UK, EU and Switzerland for
iopposing a waiver that would allow vaccine intellectual property protections
ito be lifted.[191] In October 2022, Meghan and Harry were named as Ripple of
iHope Award laureates for their work on racial justice, mental health and
iother
isocial initiatives through their foundation Archewell.[192] In April 2023,
ishe
iwas named as a recipient of the Ms. Foundation for Women's Women of Vision
iAward.[193]
i
iFrom January 2019 to February 2021, Meghan was patron of London's National
iTheatre and the Association of Commonwealth Universities.[194][195] She
icontinued her role as the private patron of Mayhew until 2022.[196] She
iremains a private patron of Smart Works.[195] From March 2019 to February
i2021, she was the vice president of The Queen's Commonwealth Trust.[197][195]
iUntil February 2021, periodically, online QCT chat sessions were conducted
iand
iuploaded to YouTube for general public viewing.[198] In October 2019, along
iwith other members of the royal family, Meghan voiced a Public Health England
iannouncement, for the "Every Mind Matters" mental health program.[199]
i
iIn 2019 Meghan was a contributor and guest editor for the September issue of
iBritish Vogue and highlighted the works of 15 women from different areas, who
iwere described as "Forces for Change".[200] Edward Enninful, editor-in-chief
iof the British Vogue, later revealed that the issue had become the
i"fastest-selling issue in the history of British Vogue".[201] In the same
iissue, it was announced that she had collaborated with a number of British
ifashion houses and stores to launch a capsule collection, called The Smart
iSet, in September 2019 to benefit the charity Smart Works. The collection
isought to help "unemployed and disadvantaged women", through selling items
i"on
ia one-for-one basis, meaning an item is donated for each item
ipurchased".[202]
iTaking advantage of the "Meghan Markle effect" (driving consumer purchases),
iin 10 days the collection provided a year's worth of clothes for the
icharity.[203]
i
iIn February 2018, Markle and fiancé Harry attended the first annual forum of
iThe Royal Foundation.[204] After marriage, Meghan became the foundation's
ifourth patron alongside Prince Harry, Prince William and his wife,
iCatherine.[205] In May 2019, as a part of their Heads Together initiative,
ithe
iDuchess of Sussex together with her husband and in-laws launched Shout, a
itext
imessaging service for those who suffer from mental issues.[206] In June 2019,
iit was announced that Harry and Meghan would split from the charity and
iestablish their own foundation. Nevertheless, the couples would collaborate
ion
imutual projects, such as the mental health initiative Heads
iTogether.[207][208] The following month, "Sussex Royal The Foundation of The
iDuke and Duchess of Sussex" was registered in England and Wales.[209]
iHowever,
iit was confirmed on February 21, 2020, that "Sussex Royal" would not be used
ias a brand name for the couple, following their step back from official life
ias working royals.[210] On August 5, 2020, the Sussex Royal Foundation was
irenamed "MWX Foundation" and dissolved the same day.[211]
i
iIn March 2021, it was reported that the Charity Commission for England and
iWales was conducting a review of the Sussex Royal organization in a
i"regulatory and compliance case" regarding its conduct under charity law
iduring dissolution.[212] Representatives for the couple claimed that Sussex
iRoyal was "managed by a board of trustees" and that "suggestion of
imismanagement" directed exclusively at the Duke and Duchess would be
iincorrect.[212] The commission later concluded that the foundation did not
iact
iunlawfully, but criticized the board of directors for expending a
i"substantial
iproportion of funds" to setting up and closing the charity.[213][214]
i
iIn April 2020, Meghan and Harry confirmed that an alternative foundation (in
ilieu of Sussex Royal) would be called "Archewell".[215] The name stems from
ithe Greek word "arche", which means "source of action"—the same word that
iinspired the name of their son.[215] Archewell was registered in the United
iStates.[216] Its website was officially launched in October 2020.[217]
i
i===== Public image and style =====
i
iBetween 2010 and 2012, Markle anonymously ran the blog The Working Actress,
iwhich detailed the "pitfalls and triumphs of struggling to make it in
iHollywood".[218] In 2014, she founded her own lifestyle blog The Tig, which
iposted articles about food, fashion, beauty, travel and inspirational
iwomen.[219] The viewing audience consisted primarily of the fans of Markle
iand
iSuits. Promotion of the blog on other social media platforms targeted three
imillion followers on Instagram, 800,000 on Facebook and 350,000 on
iTwitter.[220] In April 2017, The Tig closed. In January 2018, she took all
iarticles offline and deleted her social media accounts.[220] It is estimated
ithat Markle's social media activities annually earned her about $80,000 from
iendorsements and sponsorships.[39] She was also known for socializing at Soho
iHouse.[221]
i
iMarkle became known through The Tig for her fashion sense,[42] releasing two
ifashion collections with Canadian clothing company Reitmans in 2015 and
i2016.[220] The lines were based on her personal style and that of her Suits
icharacter.[42] Markle has cited Emmanuelle Alt as her style
iinspiration.[222][223] In 2016, she hosted USA Network's video series Power
iLunch with Meghan Markle in collaboration with Lexus and Eater, discussing
ithe
iculinary inspirations of five different New York kitchens.[224]
i
iMarkle was featured in the cover story for the October 2017 issue of Vanity
iFair and the December 2017 issue of Elle France.[225][226] Shortly after her
iengagement to Prince Harry in 2017, she caused a surge of interest in
iScottish
iretailer Strathberry after carrying one of its handbags to a public
ievent.[227][228] This was reported as an indication that her fashion choices
iwould produce results similar to the Kate Middleton effect.[227][229] After
iMarkle and Prince Harry's first appearance as a couple, brands Mackage,
iBirks,
iR&R Jewelers, Crown Jewelers and Everlane noted an upswing in their website
ihits and sales.[230][231][228] It was speculated that Markle's effect would
ibe
ibroader internationally because she already had a strong American
iappeal.[229]
iConsequently, the United States saw a boost in yellow gold jewelry sales in
ithe first quarter of 2018.[232]
i
iIn 2018, Tatler included Meghan with other senior royal women on its list of
iBritain's best dressed people.[233] Following the announcement of her
ipregnancy, she appeared in a Karen Gee dress that resulted in the Australian
idesigner's website crashing.[234] Fashion website Net-a-Porter ranked Meghan
ias one of the best dressed women in 2018.[235] She was nominated for the 2018
iTeen Choice Awards in the category Choice Style Icon.[236] In 2019, British
ibrand Reiss reported a growth in profits after Meghan was seen wearing a mini
idress by them on International Women's Day.[237] In 2022, the black Armani
idress worn by Meghan during her Oprah interview was selected by the Fashion
iMuseum, Bath, as Dress of the Year 2021.[238] In the same year, she was
ifeatured in the cover story for the 2022 Fall Fashion issue of The Cut.[239]
iThere was controversy over her claim in the interview that she had been told
iat the premiere of The Lion King that her marriage resulted in rejoicing in
iSouth Africa similar to that seen at Nelson Mandela's release from prison in
i1990.[240]
i
iIn 2018, Time selected Meghan as one of the 100 Most Influential People in
ithe World[241] and placed her on its shortlist for Person of the Year.[242]
iHer name appeared again on the listicle in 2021 and she and her husband were
ifeatured on one of the magazine's seven worldwide covers.[243] In 2019, the
imagazine named Meghan and Prince Harry among the 25 Most Influential People
ion
ithe Internet.[244] She was also chosen as one of the 25 most influential
iwomen
iin the United Kingdom by British Vogue magazine in 2018, 2019 and
i2021.[245][246][247] Her influence was also recognized in both the 2019 and
i2020 editions of Powerlist, the 100 most influential Britons of African and
iAfro-Caribbean descent.[248] In 2022, she was named as one of the 50 Women
iChanging the World over the past year by Worth magazine.[249] In the same
iyear, Variety named her as a stellar honoree for its Power of Women
iissue,[250][251] and Financial Times included her on its list of "25 most
iinfluential women of 2022".[252] In December 2022, Meghan was found to be the
isecond most disliked member of the British royal family by statistics and
ipolling company YouGov, behind her husband's uncle Prince Andrew.[253] In
iMarch 2023, The Independent included her on its "Influence List 2023".[254]
iMeghan and Harry's exit from the royal family was satirized in a 2023 episode
iof South Park.
i
i===== Privacy and the media =====
i
iIn November 2016, the MailOnline was criticized for running an article on
iMarkle's family background titled "(Almost) Straight Outta Compton", which
itriggered a response from Prince Harry's Communications Secretary.[13] In
iOctober 2019, Meghan filed a lawsuit against Associated Newspapers Limited
i(ANL), the publisher of The Mail on Sunday and MailOnline over the
ipublication
iof a letter she had sent to her father.[255][256] Thomas Markle Sr. had
iprovided the publisher with excerpts of the letter after five of his
idaughter's friends, including Abigail Spencer,[257] referenced it in a People
iarticle.[4][258][259] She subsequently received support from more than 70
ifemale MPs from different parties who in an open letter condemned the use of
i"outdated, colonial undertones" against her in some national media
ioutlets.[260] In May 2020, the court dismissed claims of the tabloid's
ialleged
idishonesty and malice, as they were deemed either vague or irrelevant to the
icase.[261] In February 2021, the High Court of Justice found in a summary
ijudgment that ANL's Mail on Sunday had invaded Meghan's privacy by publishing
ithe letter,[262] and she won her claim for "misuse of private information and
icopyright infringement" in May 2021.[263] She was given a £450,000 down
ipayment on her £1.5 million legal fees as an interim payment, and pursuant to
icopyright law, her legal team asked for a front-page statement by The Mail on
iSunday and MailOnline to acknowledge her legal victory.[264]
i
iThe Court of Appeal granted ANL permission to appeal against the ruling.[265]
iThe appeal was subsequently launched by ANL in November 2021.[266] Meghan and
iHarry's former communications secretary Jason Knauf—who had previously denied
ico-authoring the letter with Meghan[267]—gave a statement to the court of
iappeal, mentioning that Meghan gave him briefing points to share with Finding
iFreedom's authors Omid Scobie and Carolyn Durand and that Prince Harry
iwelcomed the suggestion that they should conceal their involvement, while
ithey
iboth discussed the book "on a routine basis".[268] ANL had previously applied
ito use the book in their defense.[269][270] Knauf also revealed that Meghan
iwondered whether she should refer to her father as "daddy" in the letter, as
ishe believed "in the unfortunate event that it leaked, it would pull at the
iheartstrings".[268] Meghan subsequently apologized to the court for not
iremembering the emails earlier, adding that the "extent of the information"
iKnauf shared with the book's authors was "unknown" to her.[271] She also
istated in her witness statement that she was "unable to retrieve any text
imessages with Mr Knauf" due to "an automatic deletion system" that had been
iinstalled on her devices in 2016 for security reasons.[272]
i
iIn December 2021, three senior appeal judges upheld the judgement of the High
iCourt against ANL, prompting Meghan to call for reform of the tabloid
iindustry.[273] In the same month, ANL's The Mail on Sunday and MailOnline
ipublished a front-page statement on Boxing Day acknowledging Meghan's
ivictory,
iadding that there had been an agreement on "financial remedies".[274] In
iaddition to covering a portion of Meghan's legal costs, the outlet agreed to
ipay her £1 in damages for invading her privacy and a confidential sum for
iinfringing her copyright.[275] They were also banned from naming Meghan's
ifriends, who had spoken to People magazine about the letter in 2018.[275]
i
iIn November 2016, The Sun ran the headline "Harry girl's on Pornhub".[55] The
ioutlet denied any smear after it was revealed that the clips were illegally
iuploaded scenes from the TV series Suits and not pornographic material.[55]
iThey subsequently apologized via an official statement in February 2017.[276]
iIn February 2018, a letter containing white powder and a racist note
iaddressing Markle was sent to St James's Palace, triggering counter-terrorism
iand hate crime investigations by Scotland Yard.[277] Meghan and Harry
iobtained
ia formal apology in May 2019 from Splash News for privacy invasion at their
iCotswolds residence.[278][279] The couple had a legal warning issued to the
ipress in general in January 2020 after the publication of paparazzi
iphotographs.[280] In March 2020, the couple took Splash UK to court after
iMeghan and her son were photographed without permission in Canada during a
i"private family outing". The case was settled later that year with Splash UK
iagreeing to no longer take unauthorized photos of the family.[281] The Duke
iand Duchess announced in April that they would no longer cooperate with the
iDaily Mail, The Sun, Daily Mirror and Daily Express.[282] They won an apology
iin October from American news agency X17 for taking photographs of their son
iat their home using drones.[283]
i
iIn March 2021, ITV News reported Meghan had complained directly to ITV's CEO
iabout Piers Morgan's comments on mental health following her interview with
iOprah Winfrey.[284] Ofcom received over 57,000 complaints about the program
iincluding one from the Duchess of Sussex.[285][286] In the same month, it was
ireported that an American private investigator unlawfully handed over
ipersonal
idetails about Meghan to The Sun, including her Social Security number, cell
iphone number and address, when she first started dating Prince Harry in 2016.
iMeghan and her husband condemned the "predatory practices" of the British
itabloids, while The Sun stated that the investigator "was instructed clearly
iin writing to act lawfully", and they did not "use the information he
iprovided
ifor any unlawful practice".[287]
i
iIn July 2021, Meghan filed legal complaints against The Times for two
iseparate articles, with the first one covering an unproven allegation from
iRobert Lacey's book that she had left an engagement in Fiji for not being
iappointed by UN Women as a goodwill ambassador and the second one claiming
ithat the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge had refused to talk to Prince Harry
iafter Prince Philip's funeral due to fears of a potential leak.[288][289] In
iJanuary 2022, the couple jointly filed a legal complaint against The Times
ifor
ian article reporting on Archewell raising less than $50,000 in 2020.[290] In
ithe same month, she complained to the BBC regarding their five-part podcast
iHarry, Meghan and the Media, in which the presenter Amol Rajan stated that
iMeghan had "apologized for misleading" the Court of Appeal in her case
iagainst
ithe Mail on Sunday.[291][292] The BBC responded by issuing a statement on its
i"corrections and clarifications" website to emphasize that she had
i"apologized
ito the court for not remembering email exchanges".[292]
i
iIn March 2022, Meghan's half-sister, Samantha Markle, filed a defamation
ilawsuit against her in Florida, accusing her of lying in the Oprah interview
iand disseminating false statements via her communications secretary for the
ibook Finding Freedom and sought damages in excess of $75,000.[293][294] In
iJune 2022, Meghan's initial motion to dismiss the case was rejected by a
ijudge
ifollowing amendments made by Samantha in her complaints.[295] She filed a
isecond motion in the same month.[295][296] In addition to applying for the
icase to be dismissed, Meghan's lawyer also applied for the discovery process
ito be delayed, pending the outcome of the dismissal application.[297] A
iFlorida judge later denied the application to halt the discovery
iprocess,[298]
ibut dismissed the lawsuit in March 2023.[299] In April 2023, Samantha refiled
ithe lawsuit with an amended complaint that covered statements made by Meghan
iin her Netflix docuseries as well.[300]
i
iBetween December 2022 and January 2023, more than 25,000 complaints were
isubmitted to the Independent Press Standards Organisation (IPSO) about a
icolumn by Jeremy Clarkson in The Sun,[301] in which he stated that he hated
iMeghan "on a cellular level" and dreamed "of the day when she is made to
iparade naked through the streets of every town in Britain while the crowds
ichant, 'Shame!' and throw lumps of excrement at her."[302] On December 20,
i2022, Conservative MP Caroline Nokes wrote to The Sun's editor, Victoria
iNewton, calling for "action [to be] taken" against Clarkson. The letter was
isigned by more than 60 cross-party MPs.[303] On December 23, The Sun issued
ian
iapology, stating "columnists' opinions are their own" but they "regret the
ipublication of this article" and are "sincerely sorry".[304] On the following
iday, a spokesperson for the Duke and Duchess of Sussex described the apology
ias "nothing more than a PR stunt".[305] Clarkson said his column was a
ireference to a scene from the television series Game of Thrones and he later
irevealed that he had emailed Meghan and Harry on Christmas Day 2022 to
iapologise.[301][306] A spokesperson for the couple said Clarkson wrote solely
ito Harry and the article was not an isolated incident.[301] In February 2023,
ithe IPSO announced that it was launching an investigation about the
iarticle.[307]
i
iIn 2021, shortly before Meghan and Harry were due to be interviewed by Oprah
iWinfrey, Valentine Low reported in The Times that Meghan's former
icommunications secretary, Jason Knauf, complained in October 2018 that her
iconduct at Kensington Palace had caused two personal assistants to quit and
ihad undermined the confidence of a third employee,[308] prompting an
iinvestigation by Buckingham Palace into the bullying allegations.[309][310]
iThe palace hired an external law firm to examine the claims, with ten aides
ireported to have cooperated with the review.[311][312] Criticism of Meghan
ifor
itwice wearing earrings gifted from Saudi Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman in
i2018, after he was accused of complicity in the assassination of Jamal
iKhashoggi, appeared at the same time.[313][308][314] Her representatives
idenied her awareness of the accusations against Mohammed bin Salman and said
iThe Times were being used by Buckingham Palace for "a smear campaign" against
iher.[315][308]
i
iThe television special Oprah with Meghan and Harry was broadcast on CBS on
iMarch 7, 2021.[316] Meghan spoke about her personal and royal life and public
ipressure. She claimed to have been contemplating suicide during her time as a
iworking royal and complained of a lack of protection for her and her son
iwhile
ibeing part of the royal institution.[317] There was a wide and polarized
ireaction to the interview.[318]
i
iIn an updated epilogue for the couple's unauthorized biography, Finding
iFreedom by Omid Scobie and Carolyn Durand, the authors claimed that "two of
ithe individuals mentioned in [Knauf's] email asked for any allegations made
ito
iHR about their experiences with Meghan to be rescinded".[319] Speaking on
ibehalf of the Duchess in a BBC documentary, Jenny Afia, a lawyer who
irepresented Meghan in her case against ANL, stated that the bullying
iallegations were "just not true".[320] In June 2022, The Times reported that
ithe results from the inquiry made Buckingham Palace modify some of the
ipolicies and procedures in its HR department, but the report would not be
ipublished to ensure the privacy of those who took part in it.[321]
i
iIn March 2019, European consulting firm 89up reported on their discovery of
i1,103 highly connected Twitter accounts with more than two and a half million
itweets in favor of Meghan, most of which appeared to be bots carrying out
i"coordinated attacks" on royal correspondents who had reported negatively on
iher.[322][323] In the same year, CNN had reported on research by Hope not
iHate, stating that out of 5,200 "abusive tweets directed at Meghan" in
iJanuary
iand February 2019, 3,600 came from a small group of trolls.[322] In March
i2019, the royal family introduced new rules for followers commenting its
iofficial social media accounts in response to the online abuse aimed at
iMeghan
iand her sister-in-law Catherine.[324]
i
iIn October 2021, Twitter analytics service Bot Sentinel released their
ianalysis of more than 114,000 tweets about the Duke and Duchess of Sussex, as
ia result of which they found 83 accounts with a combined number of 187,631
ifollowers that were possibly responsible for approximately 70% of the
inegative
icontent posted about the couple.[325] The report prompted an investigation by
iTwitter.[325] The company stated that it found no evidence of "widespread
icoordination" between the accounts and said that it had taken action against
iusers who violated Twitter's conduct policy.[325]
i
iBot Sentinel also released three more reports in the following months,
iarguing that the accounts were part of a "bot network" and a similar network
icould be found on YouTube.[326][327][328] In January 2022, the BBC named
iMeghan and Harry among people whose photos and videos were used in fake
iinstant profits advertisements and bitcoin-related investment schemes.[329]
i
iAmong unfounded conspiracy theories spread on social media, including Twitter
iand YouTube, were claims that Meghan had faked her pregnancies and used a
isurrogate mother, or that her children did not exist.[330][331][332]
i
i===== Titles, styles and arms =====
i
iMeghan became a princess of the United Kingdom upon her marriage to Prince
iHarry, entitled to the style of Royal Highness.[333] After her marriage, she
iwas styled "Her Royal Highness The Duchess of Sussex". She also holds the
ititles of Countess of Dumbarton and Baroness Kilkeel.[334] She is the first
iperson to hold the title "Duchess of Sussex".[335][336]
i
iFollowing the Duke and Duchess's decision to step back from royal duties in
i2020, the couple agreed not to use the style of Royal Highness in practice,
ibut they are still referred to as "His/Her Royal Highness" in legal
isettings.[337][338][339][340]
i
i===== Filmography =====
i
i===== Bibliography =====
i
i===== References =====
i
i===== Further reading =====
i
i===== External links =====
i
i
i
i  ------------- SOURCE ----------------
i
iURL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Meghan,_Duchess_of_Sussex
i
iLICENSE: Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike
i
i=========================================
i
i
i$
Bt:Meghan, Duchess of Sussex - Wikipedia	/x/w/g/https_58__47__47_en_46_wikipedia_46_org_47_wiki_47_Meghan_44__95_Duchess_95_of_95_Sussex	texopher.com	70
