i
1[?] Read Details	/x/w/gd/https_58__47__47_en_46_wikipedia_46_org_47_wiki_47_England	texopher.com	70
i
i===== Contents =====
i
i– in Europe (green & dark grey) – in the United Kingdom (green)
i
iEngland is a country that is part of the United Kingdom.[4] It shares land
iborders with Wales to its west and Scotland to its north. The Irish Sea lies
inorthwest and the Celtic Sea area of the Atlantic Ocean to the southwest. It
iis separated from continental Europe by the North Sea to the east and the
iEnglish Channel to the south. The country covers five-eighths of the island
iof
iGreat Britain, which lies in the North Atlantic, and includes over 100
ismaller
iislands, such as the Isles of Scilly and the Isle of Wight.
i
iThe area now called England was first inhabited by modern humans during the
iUpper Paleolithic period, but takes its name from the Angles, a Germanic
itribe
ideriving its name from the Anglia peninsula, who settled during the 5th and
i6th centuries. England became a unified state in the 10th century and has had
ia significant cultural and legal impact on the wider world since the Age of
iDiscovery, which began during the 15th century.[5]
i
iThe English language, the Anglican Church, and English law, which
icollectively served as the basis for the common law legal systems of many
iother countries around the world, developed in England, and the country's
iparliamentary system of government has been widely adopted by other
inations.[6] The Industrial Revolution began in 18th-century England,
itransforming its society into the world's first industrialised nation.[7]
iEngland is also home to the two oldest institutions of higher learning in the
iEnglish-speaking world, the University of Cambridge, founded in 1209, and the
iUniversity of Oxford, founded in 1096, both of which are routinely ranked
iamong the most prestigious universities globally.[8]
i
iEngland's terrain is chiefly low hills and plains, especially in the centre
iand south. Upland and mountainous terrain is mostly restricted to the north
iand west, including the Lake District, Pennines, Dartmoor and Shropshire
iHills. The capital is London, whose greater metropolitan population of 14.2
imillion as of 2021 represents the United Kingdom's largest metropolitan area.
iEngland's population of 56.3 million comprises 84% of the population of the
iUnited Kingdom,[9] largely concentrated around London, the South East, and
iconurbations in the Midlands, the North West, the North East, and Yorkshire,
iwhich each developed as major industrial regions during the 19th century.[10]
i
iThe Kingdom of England, which after 1535 included Wales, ceased being a
iseparate sovereign state on 1 May 1707, when the Acts of Union put into
ieffect
ithe terms agreed in the Treaty of Union the previous year, resulting in a
ipolitical union with the Kingdom of Scotland to create the Kingdom of Great
iBritain.[11] In 1801, Great Britain was united with the Kingdom of Ireland
ithrough another Act of Union to become the United Kingdom of Great Britain
iand
iIreland. In 1922, the Irish Free State seceded from the United Kingdom,
ileading to the latter being renamed the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
iNorthern Ireland.[12]
i
i===== Toponymy =====
i
iThe name "England" is derived from the Old English name Englaland, which
imeans "land of the Angles".[13] The Angles were one of the Germanic tribes
ithat settled in Great Britain during the Early Middle Ages. The Angles came
ifrom the Anglia peninsula in the Bay of Kiel area (present-day German state
iof
iSchleswig-Holstein) of the Baltic Sea.[14] The earliest recorded use of the
iterm, as "Engla londe", is in the late-ninth-century translation into Old
iEnglish of Bede's Ecclesiastical History of the English People. The term was
ithen used in a different sense to the modern one, meaning "the land inhabited
iby the English", and it included English people in what is now south-east
iScotland but was then part of the English kingdom of Northumbria. The
iAnglo-Saxon Chronicle recorded that the Domesday Book of 1086 covered the
iwhole of England, meaning the English kingdom, but a few years later the
iChronicle stated that King Malcolm III went "out of Scotlande into Lothian in
iEnglaland", thus using it in the more ancient sense.[15]
i
iThe earliest attested reference to the Angles occurs in the 1st-century work
iby Tacitus, Germania, in which the Latin word Anglii is used.[16] The
ietymology of the tribal name itself is disputed by scholars; it has been
isuggested that it derives from the shape of the Angeln peninsula, an angular
ishape.[17] How and why a term derived from the name of a tribe that was less
isignificant than others, such as the Saxons, came to be used for the entire
icountry and its people is not known, but it seems this is related to the
icustom of calling the Germanic people in Britain Angli Saxones or English
iSaxons to distinguish them from continental Saxons (Eald-Seaxe) of Old Saxony
ibetween the Weser and Eider rivers in Northern Germany.[18] In Scottish
iGaelic, another language which developed on the island of Great Britain, the
iSaxon tribe gave their name to the word for England (Sasunn);[19] similarly,
ithe Welsh name for the English language is "Saesneg". A romantic name for
iEngland is Loegria, related to the Welsh word for England, Lloegr, and made
ipopular by its use in Arthurian legend. Albion is also applied to England in
ia
imore poetic capacity,[20] though its original meaning is the island of
iBritain
ias a whole.
i
i===== History =====
i
iThe earliest known evidence of human presence in the area now known as
iEngland was that of Homo antecessor, dating to approximately 780,000 years
iago. The oldest proto-human bones discovered in England date from 500,000
iyears ago.[21] Modern humans are known to have inhabited the area during the
iUpper Paleolithic period, though permanent settlements were only established
iwithin the last 6,000 years.[22] After the last ice age only large mammals
isuch as mammoths, bison and woolly rhinoceros remained. Roughly 11,000 years
iago, when the ice sheets began to recede, humans repopulated the area;
igenetic
iresearch suggests they came from the northern part of the Iberian
iPeninsula.[23] The sea level was lower than the present day and Britain was
iconnected by land bridge to Ireland and Eurasia.[24] As the seas rose, it was
iseparated from Ireland 10,000 years ago and from Eurasia two millennia later.
i
iThe Beaker culture arrived around 2,500 BC, introducing drinking and food
ivessels constructed from clay, as well as vessels used as reduction pots to
ismelt copper ores.[25] It was during this time that major Neolithic monuments
isuch as Stonehenge and Avebury were constructed. By heating together tin and
icopper, which were in abundance in the area, the Beaker culture people made
ibronze, and later iron from iron ores. The development of iron smelting
iallowed the construction of better ploughs, advancing agriculture (for
iinstance, with Celtic fields), as well as the production of more effective
iweapons.[26]
i
iDuring the Iron Age, Celtic culture, deriving from the Hallstatt and La Tène
icultures, arrived from Central Europe. Brythonic was the spoken language
iduring this time. Society was tribal; according to Ptolemy's Geographia there
iwere around 20 tribes in the area. Earlier divisions are unknown because the
iBritons were not literate. Like other regions on the edge of the Empire,
iBritain had long enjoyed trading links with the Romans. Julius Caesar of the
iRoman Republic attempted to invade twice in 55 BC; although largely
iunsuccessful, he managed to set up a client king from the Trinovantes.
i
iThe Romans invaded Britain in 43 AD during the reign of Emperor Claudius,
isubsequently conquering much of Britain, and the area was incorporated into
ithe Roman Empire as Britannia province.[27] The best-known of the native
itribes who attempted to resist were the Catuvellauni led by Caratacus. Later,
ian uprising led by Boudica, Queen of the Iceni, ended with Boudica's suicide
ifollowing her defeat at the Battle of Watling Street.[28] The author of one
istudy of Roman Britain suggested that from 43 AD to 84 AD, the Roman invaders
ikilled somewhere between 100,000 and 250,000 people from a population of
iperhaps 2,000,000.[29] This era saw a Greco-Roman culture prevail with the
iintroduction of Roman law, Roman architecture, aqueducts, sewers, many
iagricultural items and silk.[30] In the 3rd century, Emperor Septimius
iSeverus
idied at Eboracum (now York), where Constantine was subsequently proclaimed
iemperor a century later.[31]
i
iThere is debate about when Christianity was first introduced; it was no later
ithan the 4th century, probably much earlier. According to Bede, missionaries
iwere sent from Rome by Eleutherius at the request of the chieftain Lucius of
iBritain in 180 AD, to settle differences as to Eastern and Western
iceremonials, which were disturbing the church. There are traditions linked to
iGlastonbury claiming an introduction through Joseph of Arimathea, while
iothers
iclaim through Lucius of Britain.[32] By 410, during the decline of the Roman
iEmpire, Britain was left exposed by the end of Roman rule in Britain and the
iwithdrawal of Roman army units, to defend the frontiers in continental Europe
iand partake in civil wars.[33] Celtic Christian monastic and missionary
imovements flourished: Patrick (5th-century Ireland) and in the 6th century
iBrendan (Clonfert), Comgall (Bangor), David (Wales), Aiden (Lindisfarne) and
iColumba (Iona). This period of Christianity was influenced by ancient Celtic
iculture in its sensibilities, polity, practices and theology. Local
i"congregations" were centred in the monastic community and monastic leaders
iwere more like chieftains, as peers, rather than in the more hierarchical
isystem of the Roman-dominated church.[34]
i
iRoman military withdrawals left Britain open to invasion by pagan, seafaring
iwarriors from north-western continental Europe, chiefly the Saxons, Angles,
iJutes and Frisians who had long raided the coasts of the Roman province.
iThese
igroups then began to settle in increasing numbers over the course of the
ififth
iand sixth centuries, initially in the eastern part of the country.[33] Their
iadvance was contained for some decades after the Britons' victory at the
iBattle of Mount Badon, but subsequently resumed, overrunning the fertile
ilowlands of Britain and reducing the area under Brittonic control to a series
iof separate enclaves in the more rugged country to the west by the end of the
i6th century. Contemporary texts describing this period are extremely scarce,
igiving rise to its description as a Dark Age. The nature and progression of
ithe Anglo-Saxon settlement of Britain is consequently subject to considerable
idisagreement; the emerging consensus is that it occurred on a large scale in
ithe south and east but was less substantial to the north and west, where
iCeltic languages continued to be spoken even in areas under Anglo-Saxon
icontrol.[35][36] Roman-dominated Christianity had, in general, been replaced
iin the conquered territories by Anglo-Saxon paganism, but was reintroduced by
imissionaries from Rome led by Augustine from 597 onwards.[37] Disputes
ibetween
ithe Roman- and Celtic-dominated forms of Christianity ended in victory for
ithe
iRoman tradition at the Council of Whitby (664), which was ostensibly about
itonsures (clerical haircuts) and the date of Easter, but more significantly,
iabout the differences in Roman and Celtic forms of authority, theology, and
ipractice.[34]
i
iDuring the settlement period the lands ruled by the incomers seem to have
ibeen fragmented into numerous tribal territories, but by the 7th century,
iwhen
isubstantial evidence of the situation again becomes available, these had
icoalesced into roughly a dozen kingdoms including Northumbria, Mercia,
iWessex,
iEast Anglia, Essex, Kent and Sussex. Over the following centuries, this
iprocess of political consolidation continued.[38] The 7th century saw a
istruggle for hegemony between Northumbria and Mercia, which in the 8th
icentury
igave way to Mercian preeminence.[39] In the early 9th century Mercia was
idisplaced as the foremost kingdom by Wessex. Later in that century escalating
iattacks by the Danes culminated in the conquest of the north and east of
iEngland, overthrowing the kingdoms of Northumbria, Mercia and East Anglia.
iWessex under Alfred the Great was left as the only surviving English kingdom,
iand under his successors, it steadily expanded at the expense of the kingdoms
iof the Danelaw. This brought about the political unification of England,
ifirst
iaccomplished under Æthelstan in 927 and definitively established after
ifurther
iconflicts by Eadred in 953. A fresh wave of Scandinavian attacks from the
ilate
i10th century ended with the conquest of this united kingdom by Sweyn
iForkbeard
iin 1013 and again by his son Cnut in 1016, turning it into the centre of a
ishort-lived North Sea Empire that also included Denmark and Norway. However,
ithe native royal dynasty was restored with the accession of Edward the
iConfessor in 1042.
i
iA dispute over the succession to Edward led to the Norman Conquest in 1066,
iaccomplished by an army led by Duke William of Normandy.[40] The Normans
ithemselves originated from Scandinavia and had settled in Normandy in the
ilate
i9th and early 10th centuries.[41] This conquest led to the almost total
idispossession of the English elite and its replacement by a new
iFrench-speaking aristocracy, whose speech had a profound and permanent effect
ion the English language.[42]
i
iSubsequently, the House of Plantagenet from Anjou inherited the English
ithrone under Henry II, adding England to the budding Angevin Empire of fiefs
ithe family had inherited in France including Aquitaine.[43] They reigned for
ithree centuries, some noted monarchs being Richard I, Edward I, Edward III
iand
iHenry V.[43] The period saw changes in trade and legislation, including the
isigning of the Magna Carta, an English legal charter used to limit the
isovereign's powers by law and protect the privileges of freemen. Catholic
imonasticism flourished, providing philosophers, and the universities of
iOxford
iand Cambridge were founded with royal patronage. The Principality of Wales
ibecame a Plantagenet fief during the 13th century[44] and the Lordship of
iIreland was given to the English monarchy by the Pope.
i
iDuring the 14th century, the Plantagenets and the House of Valois both
iclaimed to be legitimate claimants to the House of Capet and with it France;
ithe two powers clashed in the Hundred Years' War.[45] The Black Death
iepidemic
ihit England; starting in 1348, it eventually killed up to half of England's
iinhabitants.[46] From 1453 to 1487 civil war occurred between two branches of
ithe royal family – the Yorkists and Lancastrians – known as the Wars of the
iRoses.[47] Eventually it led to the Yorkists losing the throne entirely to a
iWelsh noble family the Tudors, a branch of the Lancastrians headed by Henry
iTudor who invaded with Welsh and Breton mercenaries, gaining victory at the
iBattle of Bosworth Field where the Yorkist king Richard III was killed.[48]
i
iDuring the Tudor period, the Renaissance reached England through Italian
icourtiers, who reintroduced artistic, educational and scholarly debate from
iclassical antiquity.[49] England began to develop naval skills, and
iexploration to the West intensified.[50] Henry VIII broke from communion with
ithe Catholic Church, over issues relating to his divorce, under the Acts of
iSupremacy in 1534 which proclaimed the monarch head of the Church of England.
iIn contrast with much of European Protestantism, the roots of the split were
imore political than theological.[a] He also legally incorporated his
iancestral
iland Wales into the Kingdom of England with the 1535–1542 acts. There were
iinternal religious conflicts during the reigns of Henry's daughters, Mary I
iand Elizabeth I. The former took the country back to Catholicism while the
ilatter broke from it again, forcefully asserting the supremacy of
iAnglicanism.
iThe Elizabethan era is the epoch in the Tudor age of the reign of Queen
iElizabeth I ("the Virgin Queen"). Historians often depict it as the golden
iage
iin English history. Elizabethan England represented the apogee of the English
iRenaissance and saw the flowering of art, poetry, music and literature.[52]
iThe era is most famous for its drama, theatre and playwrights. England during
ithis period had a centralised, well-organised, and effective government as a
iresult of vast Tudor reforms.[53]
i
iCompeting with Spain, the first English colony in the Americas was founded in
i1585 by explorer Walter Raleigh in Virginia and named Roanoke. The Roanoke
icolony failed and is known as the lost colony after it was found abandoned on
ithe return of the late-arriving supply ship.[54] With the East India Company,
iEngland also competed with the Dutch and French in the East. During the
iElizabethan period, England was at war with Spain. An armada sailed from
iSpain
iin 1588 as part of a wider plan to invade England and re-establish a Catholic
imonarchy. The plan was thwarted by bad coordination, stormy weather and
isuccessful harrying attacks by an English fleet under Lord Howard of
iEffingham. This failure did not end the threat: Spain launched two further
iarmadas, in 1596 and 1597, but both were driven back by storms.
i
iThe political structure of the island changed in 1603, when the King of
iScots, James VI, a kingdom which had been a long-time rival to English
iinterests, inherited the throne of England as James I, thereby creating a
ipersonal union.[55] He styled himself King of Great Britain, although this
ihad
ino basis in English law.[56] Under the auspices of James VI and I the
iAuthorised King James Version of the Holy Bible was published in 1611. It was
ithe standard version of the Bible read by most Protestant Christians for four
ihundred years until modern revisions were produced in the 20th century.
i
iBased on conflicting political, religious and social positions, the English
iCivil War was fought between the supporters of Parliament and those of King
iCharles I, known colloquially as Roundheads and Cavaliers respectively. This
iwas an interwoven part of the wider multifaceted Wars of the Three Kingdoms,
iinvolving Scotland and Ireland. The Parliamentarians were victorious, Charles
iI was executed and the kingdom replaced by the Commonwealth. Leader of the
iParliament forces, Oliver Cromwell declared himself Lord Protector in 1653; a
iperiod of personal rule followed.[57] After Cromwell's death and the
iresignation of his son Richard as Lord Protector, Charles II was invited to
ireturn as monarch in 1660, in a move called the Restoration. With the
ireopening of theatres, fine arts, literature and performing arts flourished
ithroughout the Restoration of ''the Merry Monarch'' Charles II.[58] After the
iGlorious Revolution of 1688, it was constitutionally established that King
iand
iParliament should rule together, though Parliament would have the real power.
iThis was established with the Bill of Rights in 1689. Among the statutes set
idown were that the law could only be made by Parliament and could not be
isuspended by the King, also that the King could not impose taxes or raise an
iarmy without the prior approval of Parliament.[59] Also since that time, no
iBritish monarch has entered the House of Commons when it is sitting, which is
iannually commemorated at the State Opening of Parliament by the British
imonarch when the doors of the House of Commons are slammed in the face of the
imonarch's messenger, symbolising the rights of Parliament and its
iindependence
ifrom the monarch.[60] With the founding of the Royal Society in 1660, science
iwas greatly encouraged.
i
iIn 1666, the Great Fire of London gutted the City of London but it was
irebuilt shortly afterwards[61] with many significant buildings designed by
iChristopher Wren. In Parliament two factions had emerged – the Tories and
iWhigs. Though the Tories initially supported Catholic king James II, some of
ithem, along with the Whigs, during the Revolution of 1688 invited Dutch
iPrince
iWilliam of Orange to defeat James and ultimately to become William III of
iEngland. Some English people, especially in the north, were Jacobites and
icontinued to support James and his sons. Under the Stuart dynasty England
iexpanded in trade, finance and prosperity. Britain developed Europe's largest
imerchant fleet.[62] After the parliaments of England and Scotland agreed,[63]
ithe two countries joined in political union, to create the Kingdom of Great
iBritain in 1707.[55] To accommodate the union, institutions such as the law
iand national churches of each remained separate.[64]
i
iUnder the newly formed Kingdom of Great Britain, output from the Royal
iSociety and other English initiatives combined with the Scottish
iEnlightenment
ito create innovations in science and engineering, while the enormous growth
iin
iBritish overseas trade protected by the Royal Navy paved the way for the
iestablishment of the British Empire. Domestically it drove the Industrial
iRevolution, a period of profound change in the socioeconomic and cultural
iconditions of England, resulting in industrialised agriculture, manufacture,
iengineering and mining, as well as new and pioneering road, rail and water
inetworks to facilitate their expansion and development.[65] The opening of
iNorthwest England's Bridgewater Canal in 1761 ushered in the canal age in
iBritain.[66] In 1825 the world's first permanent steam locomotive-hauled
ipassenger railway – the Stockton and Darlington Railway – opened to the
ipublic.[66]
i
iDuring the Industrial Revolution, many workers moved from England's
icountryside to new and expanding urban industrial areas to work in factories,
ifor instance at Birmingham and Manchester, dubbed "Workshop of the World" and
i"Warehouse City" respectively.[68] Manchester was the world's first
iindustrial
icity.[69] England maintained relative stability throughout the French
iRevolution; William Pitt the Younger was British prime minister for the reign
iof George III. The Regency of George IV is noted for its elegance and
iachievements in the fine arts and architecture.[70] During the Napoleonic
iWars, Napoleon planned to invade from the south-east. However, this failed to
imanifest and the Napoleonic forces were defeated by the British: at sea by
iHoratio Nelson, and on land by Arthur Wellesley. The major victory at the
iBattle of Trafalgar confirmed the naval supremacy Britain had established
iduring the course of the eighteenth century.[71] The Napoleonic Wars fostered
ia concept of Britishness and a united national British people, shared with
ithe
iEnglish, Scots and Welsh.[72]
i
iLondon became the largest and most populous metropolitan area in the world
iduring the Victorian era, and trade within the British Empire – as well as
ithe
istanding of the British military and navy – was prestigious.[73]
iTechnologically, this era saw many innovations that proved key to the United
iKingdom's power and prosperity.[74] Political agitation at home from radicals
isuch as the Chartists and the suffragettes enabled legislative reform and
iuniversal suffrage.[75] Samuel Hynes described the Edwardian era as a
i"leisurely time when women wore picture hats and did not vote, when the rich
iwere not ashamed to live conspicuously, and the sun really never set on the
iBritish flag."[76]
i
iPower shifts in east-central Europe led to World War I; hundreds of thousands
iof English soldiers died fighting for the United Kingdom as part of the
iAllies.[b] Two decades later, in World War II, the United Kingdom was again
ione of the Allies. At the end of the Phoney War, Winston Churchill became the
iwartime prime minister. Developments in warfare technology saw many cities
idamaged by air-raids during the Blitz. Following the war, the British Empire
iexperienced rapid decolonisation, and there was a speeding-up of
itechnological
iinnovations; automobiles became the primary means of transport and Frank
iWhittle's development of the jet engine led to wider air travel.[78]
iResidential patterns were altered in England by private motoring, and by the
icreation of the National Health Service (NHS) in 1948. The UK's NHS provided
ipublicly funded health care to all UK permanent residents free at the point
iof
ineed, being paid for from general taxation. Combined, these prompted the
ireform of local government in England in the mid-20th century.[79]
i
iSince the 20th century, there has been significant population movement to
iEngland, mostly from other parts of the British Isles, but also from the
iCommonwealth, particularly the Indian subcontinent.[80] Since the 1970s there
ihas been a large move away from manufacturing and an increasing emphasis on
ithe service industry.[81] As part of the United Kingdom, the area joined a
icommon market initiative called the European Economic Community which became
ithe European Union. Since the late 20th century the administration of the
iUnited Kingdom has moved towards devolved governance in Scotland, Wales and
iNorthern Ireland.[82] England and Wales continues to exist as a jurisdiction
iwithin the United Kingdom.[83] Devolution has stimulated a greater emphasis
ion
ia more English-specific identity and patriotism.[84] There is no devolved
iEnglish government, but an attempt to create a similar system on a
isub-regional basis was rejected by referendum.[85]
i
i===== Governance =====
i
iEngland is part of the United Kingdom, a constitutional monarchy with a
iparliamentary system.[86] There has not been a government of England since
i1707, when the Acts of Union 1707, putting into effect the terms of the
iTreaty
iof Union, joined England and Scotland to form the Kingdom of Great
iBritain.[63] Before the union England was ruled by its monarch and the
iParliament of England. Today England is governed directly by the Parliament
iof
ithe United Kingdom, although other countries of the United Kingdom have
idevolved governments.[87] In the House of Commons which is the lower house of
ithe British Parliament based at the Palace of Westminster, there are 532
iMembers of Parliament (MPs) for constituencies in England, out of the 650
itotal.[88] As of the 2019 United Kingdom general election, England is
irepresented by 345 MPs from the Conservative Party, 179 from the Labour
iParty,
iseven from the Liberal Democrats, one from the Green Party, and the Speaker
iof
ithe House, Lindsay Hoyle.
i
iSince devolution, in which other countries of the United Kingdom – Scotland,
iWales and Northern Ireland – each have their own devolved parliament or
iassemblies for local issues, there has been debate about how to
icounterbalance
ithis in England. Originally it was planned that various regions of England
iwould be devolved, but following the proposal's rejection by the North East
iin
ia 2004 referendum, this has not been carried out.[85]
i
iOne major issue is the West Lothian question, in which MPs from Scotland and
iWales are able to vote on legislation affecting only England, while English
iMPs have no equivalent right to legislate on devolved matters.[89] This when
iplaced in the context of England being the only country of the United Kingdom
inot to have free prescriptions and free top-up university fees,[90] has led
ito
ia steady rise in English nationalism.[91] Some have suggested the creation of
ia devolved English parliament,[92] while others have proposed simply limiting
ivoting on legislation which only affects England to English MPs.[93]
i
iThe English law legal system, developed over the centuries, is the basis of
icommon law[94] legal systems used in most Commonwealth countries[95] and the
iUnited States (except Louisiana). Despite now being part of the United
iKingdom, the legal system of the Courts of England and Wales continued, under
ithe Treaty of Union, as a separate legal system from the one used in
iScotland.
iThe general essence of English law is that it is made by judges sitting in
icourts, applying their common sense and knowledge of legal precedent – stare
idecisis – to the facts before them.[96]
i
iThe court system is headed by the Senior Courts of England and Wales,
iconsisting of the Court of Appeal, the High Court of Justice for civil cases,
iand the Crown Court for criminal cases.[97] The Supreme Court of the United
iKingdom is the highest court for criminal and civil cases in England and
iWales. It was created in 2009 after constitutional changes, taking over the
ijudicial functions of the House of Lords.[98] A decision of the Supreme Court
iis binding on every other court in the hierarchy, which must follow its
idirections.[99]
i
iThe Secretary of State for Justice is the minister responsible to Parliament
ifor the judiciary, the court system and prisons and probation in
iEngland.[100]
iCrime increased between 1981 and 1995 but fell by 42% in the period
i1995–2006.[101] The prison population doubled over the same period, giving it
ione of the highest incarceration rates in Western Europe at 147 per
i100,000.[102] His Majesty's Prison Service, reporting to the Ministry of
iJustice, manages most prisons, housing 81,309 prisoners in England and Wales
ias of September 2022[update].[103]
i
iThe subdivisions of England consist of up to four levels of subnational
idivision controlled through a variety of types of administrative entities
icreated for the purposes of local government.
i
iOutside the London region, England's highest tier is the 48 ceremonial
icounties.[104] These are used primarily as a geographical frame of reference
iand 38 developed gradually since the Middle Ages, these were reformed to 51
iin
i1974 and to its current number in 1996.[105] Each has a lord lieutenant and
ihigh sheriff; these posts are used to represent the British monarch
ilocally.[104] Some counties, such as Herefordshire, are only divided any
ifurther into civil parishes. The royal county and Berkshire and the
imetropolitan counties different types of status to other ceremonial counties.
i
iThe second tier is combined authorities and the 27 county-tier shire
icounties. In 1974, all ceremonial counties were two tier and with the
imetropolitan county-tier phased out, the 1996 reform separated the ceremonial
icounty and county-tier.
i
iEngland is also divided into local government districts.[106] The district
ican align to a ceremonial county, be a district-tier under the county-tier
ishire counties, be a royal or metropolitan borough, have borough or city
istatus or have unitary authority.
i
iAt the community level, much of England is divided into civil parishes with
icouncils; in Greater London only one, Queen's Park, exists as of 2014[update]
iafter they were abolished in 1965 until legislation allowed their recreation
iin 2007.
i
iFrom 1994 until the early 2010s England was divided into regions, a 1998
ireferendum for the London Region created the London Assembly two years
ilater.[107] A failed 2004 North East England devolution referendum cancelled
ifurther regional assembly devolution[85] with the regional structure outside
iLondon abolished.
i
iCeremonially the region is divided between the City of London and Greater
iLondon, this is further divided into the 32 London Boroughs and the 25 Wards
iof the City of London.[108]
i
i===== Geography =====
i
iGeographically, England includes the central and southern two-thirds of the
iisland of Great Britain, plus such offshore islands as the Isle of Wight and
ithe Isles of Scilly. It is bordered by two other countries of the United
iKingdom: to the north by Scotland and to the west by Wales. England is closer
ithan any other part of mainland Britain to the European continent. It is
iseparated from France (Hauts-de-France) by a 21-mile (34 km)[109] sea gap,
ithough the two countries are connected by the Channel Tunnel near
iFolkestone.[110] England also has shores on the Irish Sea, North Sea and
iAtlantic Ocean.
i
iThe ports of London, Liverpool, and Newcastle lie on the tidal rivers Thames,
iMersey and Tyne respectively. At 220 miles (350 km), the Severn is the
ilongest
iriver flowing through England.[111] It empties into the Bristol Channel and
iis
inotable for its Severn Bore (a tidal bore), which can reach 2 metres (6.6 ft)
iin height.[112] However, the longest river entirely in England is the Thames,
iwhich is 215 miles (346 km) in length.[113]
i
iThere are many lakes in England; the largest is Windermere, within the aptly
inamed Lake District.[114] Most of England's landscape consists of low hills
iand plains, with upland and mountainous terrain in the north and west of the
icountry. The northern uplands include the Pennines, a chain of uplands
idividing east and west, the Lake District mountains in Cumbria, and the
iCheviot Hills, straddling the border between England and Scotland. The
ihighest
ipoint in England, at 978 metres (3,209 ft), is Scafell Pike in the Lake
iDistrict.[114] The Shropshire Hills are near Wales while Dartmoor and Exmoor
iare two upland areas in the south-west of the country. The approximate
idividing line between terrain types is often indicated by the Tees–Exe
iline.[115]
i
iIn geological terms, the Pennines, known as the "backbone of England", are
ithe oldest range of mountains in the country, originating from the end of the
iPaleozoic Era around 300 million years ago.[116] Their geological composition
iincludes, among others, sandstone and limestone, and also coal. There are
ikarst landscapes in calcite areas such as parts of Yorkshire and Derbyshire.
iThe Pennine landscape is high moorland in upland areas, indented by fertile
ivalleys of the region's rivers. They contain two national parks, the
iYorkshire
iDales and the Peak District. In the West Country, Dartmoor and Exmoor of the
iSouthwest Peninsula include upland moorland supported by granite, and enjoy a
imild climate; both are national parks.[117]
i
iThe English Lowlands are in the central and southern regions of the country,
iconsisting of green rolling hills, including the Cotswold Hills, Chiltern
iHills, North and South Downs; where they meet the sea they form white rock
iexposures such as the cliffs of Dover. This also includes relatively flat
iplains such as the Salisbury Plain, Somerset Levels, South Coast Plain and
iThe
iFens.
i
iEngland has a temperate maritime climate: it is mild with temperatures not
imuch lower than 0 °C (32 °F) in winter and not much higher than 32 °C (90 °F)
iin summer.[118] The weather is damp relatively frequently and is changeable.
iThe coldest months are January and February, the latter particularly on the
iEnglish coast, while July is normally the warmest month. Months with mild to
iwarm weather are May, June, September and October.[118] Rainfall is spread
ifairly evenly throughout the year.
i
iImportant influences on the climate of England are its proximity to the
iAtlantic Ocean, its northern latitude and the warming of the sea by the Gulf
iStream.[118] Rainfall is higher in the west, and parts of the Lake District
ireceive more rain than anywhere else in the country.[118] Since weather
irecords began, the highest temperature recorded was 40.3 °C (104.5 °F) on 19
iJuly 2022 at Coningsby, Lincolnshire,[119] while the lowest was −26.1 °C
i(−15.0 °F) on 10 January 1982 in Edgmond, Shropshire.[120]
i
iThe fauna of England is similar to that of other areas in the British Isles
iwith a wide range of vertebrate and invertebrate life in a diverse range of
ihabitats.[123]
i
iNational nature reserves in England are designated by Natural England as key
iplaces for wildlife and natural features in England. They were established to
iprotect the most significant areas of habitat and of geological formations.
iNNRs are managed on behalf of the nation, many by Natural England themselves,
ibut also by non-governmental organisations, including the members of The
iWildlife Trusts partnership, the National Trust, and the Royal Society for
ithe
iProtection of Birds. There are 229 NNRs in England covering 939 square
ikilometres (363 square miles). Often they contain rare species or nationally
iimportant populations of plants and animals.[124]
i
iThe Environment Agency is a non-departmental public body, established in 1995
iand sponsored by the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs with
iresponsibilities relating to the protection and enhancement of the
ienvironment
iin England.[125] The Secretary of State for Environment, Food and Rural
iAffairs is the minister responsible for environmental protection,
iagriculture,
ifisheries and rural communities in England.[126]
i
iEngland has a temperate oceanic climate in most areas, lacking extremes of
icold or heat, but does have a few small areas of subarctic and warmer areas
iin
ithe South West. Towards the North of England the climate becomes colder and
imost of England's mountains and high hills are located here and have a major
iimpact on the climate and thus the local fauna of the areas. Deciduous
iwoodlands are common across all of England and provide a great habitat for
imuch of England's wildlife, but these give way in northern and upland areas
iof
iEngland to coniferous forests (mainly plantations) which also benefit certain
iforms of wildlife. Some species have adapted to the expanded urban
ienvironment, particularly the red fox, which is the most successful urban
imammal after the brown rat, and other animals such as common wood pigeon,
iboth
iof which thrive in urban and suburban areas.[127]
i
iGrey squirrels introduced from eastern America have forced the decline of the
inative red squirrel due to competition. Red squirrels are now confined to
iupland and coniferous-forested areas of England, mainly in the north, south
iwest and Isle of Wight. England's climate is very suitable for lagomorphs and
ithe country has rabbits and brown hares which were introduced in Roman
itimes.[128] Mountain hares which are indigenous have now been re-introduced
iin
iDerbyshire. The fauna of England has to cope with varying temperatures and
iconditions, although not extreme they do pose potential challenges and
iadaptational measures. English fauna has however had to cope with
iindustrialisation, human population densities amongst the highest in Europe
iand intensive farming, but as England is a developed nation, wildlife and the
icountryside have entered the English mindset more and the country is very
iconscientious about preserving its wildlife, environment and
icountryside.[129]
i
iThe Greater London Built-up Area is by far the largest urban area in
iEngland[130] and one of the busiest cities in the world. It is considered a
iglobal city and has a population larger than any other country in the United
iKingdom besides England itself.[130] Other urban areas of considerable size
iand influence tend to be in northern England or the English Midlands.[130]
iThere are 50 settlements which have designated city status in England, while
ithe wider United Kingdom has 66.
i
iWhile many cities in England are quite large, such as Birmingham, Sheffield,
iManchester, Liverpool, Leeds, Newcastle, Bradford, Nottingham, population
isize
iis not a prerequisite for city status.[131] Traditionally the status was
igiven
ito towns with diocesan cathedrals, so there are smaller cities like Wells,
iEly, Ripon, Truro and Chichester.
i
i===== Economy =====
i
iEngland's economy is one of the largest and most dynamic in the world, with
ian average GDP per capita of £28,100. HM Treasury, led by the Chancellor of
ithe Exchequer, is responsible for developing and executing the government's
ipublic finance policy and economic policy.[133] Usually regarded as a mixed
imarket economy, it has adopted many free market principles, yet maintains an
iadvanced social welfare infrastructure.[134] The official currency in England
iis the pound sterling, whose ISO 4217 code is GBP. Taxation in England is
iquite competitive when compared to much of the rest of Europe – as of
i2014[update] the basic rate of personal tax is 20% on taxable income up to
i£31,865 above the personal tax-free allowance (normally £10,000), and 40% on
iany additional earnings above that amount.[135]
i
iThe economy of England is the largest part of the UK's economy,[136] which
ihas the 18th highest GDP PPP per capita in the world. England is a leader in
ithe chemical[137] and pharmaceutical sectors and in key technical industries,
iparticularly aerospace, the arms industry, and the manufacturing side of the
isoftware industry. London, home to the London Stock Exchange, the United
iKingdom's main stock exchange and the largest in Europe, is England's
ifinancial centre, with 100 of Europe's 500 largest corporations being based
ithere.[138] London is the largest financial centre in Europe, and as of
i2014[update] is the second largest in the world.[139]
i
iThe Bank of England, founded in 1694, is the United Kingdom's central bank.
iOriginally established as private banker to the government of England, since
i1946 it has been a state-owned institution.[140] The bank has a monopoly on
ithe issue of banknotes in England and Wales, although not in other parts of
ithe United Kingdom. The government has devolved responsibility to the bank's
iMonetary Policy Committee for managing the monetary policy of the country and
isetting interest rates.[141]
i
iEngland is highly industrialised, but since the 1970s there has been a
idecline in traditional heavy and manufacturing industries, and an increasing
iemphasis on a more service industry oriented economy.[81] Tourism has become
ia
isignificant industry, attracting millions of visitors to England each year.
iThe export part of the economy is dominated by pharmaceuticals, cars
i(although
imany English marques are now foreign-owned, such as Land Rover, Lotus, Jaguar
iand Bentley), crude oil and petroleum from the English parts of North Sea oil
ialong with Wytch Farm, aircraft engines and alcoholic beverages.[142] The
icreative industries accounted for 7 per cent GVA in 2005 and grew at an
iaverage of 6 per cent per annum between 1997 and 2005.[143]
i
iMost of the UK's £30 billion[144] aerospace industry is primarily based in
iEngland. The global market opportunity for UK aerospace manufacturers over
ithe
inext two decades is estimated at £3.5 trillion.[145] GKN Aerospace, an expert
iin metallic and composite aerostructures involved in almost every civil and
imilitary fixed and rotary wing aircraft in production, is based in
iRedditch.[146]
i
iBAE Systems makes large sections of the Typhoon Eurofighter at its
isub-assembly plant in Samlesbury and assembles the aircraft for the RAF at
iits
iWarton plant, near Preston. It is also a principal subcontractor on the F35
iJoint Strike Fighter – the world's largest single defence project – for which
iit designs and manufactures a range of components including the aft fuselage,
ivertical and horizontal tail and wing tips and fuel system. It also
imanufactures the Hawk, the world's most successful jet training
iaircraft.[146]
i
iRolls-Royce PLC is the world's second-largest aero-engine manufacturer. Its
iengines power more than 30 types of commercial aircraft, and it has more
i30,000 engines currently in service across both the civil and defence
isectors.
iWith a workforce of over 12,000 people, Derby has the largest concentration
iof
iRolls-Royce employees in the UK. Rolls-Royce also produces low-emission power
isystems for ships; makes critical equipment and safety systems for the
inuclear
iindustry and powers offshore platforms and major pipelines for the oil and
igas
iindustry.[146][147] The pharmaceutical industry plays an important role in
ithe
ieconomy, and the UK has the third-highest share of global pharmaceutical R&D
iexpenditures.[148]
i
iMuch of the UK's space industry is centred on EADS Astrium, based in
iStevenage and Portsmouth. The company builds the buses – the underlying
istructure onto which the payload and propulsion systems are built – for most
iof the European Space Agency's spacecraft, as well as commercial satellites.
iThe world leader in compact satellite systems, Surrey Satellite Technology,
iis
ialso part of Astrium.[146] Reaction Engines Limited, the company planning to
ibuild Skylon, a single-stage-to-orbit spaceplane using their SABRE rocket
iengine, a combined-cycle, air-breathing rocket propulsion system is based in
iCulham. The UK space industry was worth £9.1bn in 2011 and employed 29,000
ipeople. It is growing at a rate of 7.5 per cent annually, according to its
iumbrella organisation, the UK Space Agency. In 2013, the British Government
ipledged £60 million to the Skylon project: this investment will provide
isupport at a "crucial stage" to allow a full-scale prototype of the SABRE
iengine to be built.[citation needed]
i
iAgriculture is intensive, highly mechanised and efficient by European
istandards, producing 60% of food needs with only 2% of the labour force.[149]
iTwo-thirds of production is devoted to livestock, the other to arable
icrops.[150] The main crops that are grown are wheat, barley, oats, potatoes,
isugar beets. England retains a significant, though much reduced fishing
iindustry. Its fleets bring home fish of every kind, ranging from sole to
iherring. It is also rich in natural resources including coal, petroleum,
inatural gas, tin, limestone, iron ore, salt, clay, chalk, gypsum, lead, and
isilica.[151]
i
iProminent English figures from the field of science and mathematics include
iSir Isaac Newton, Michael Faraday, Charles Darwin, Robert Hooke, James
iPrescott Joule, John Dalton, Lord Rayleigh, J. J. Thomson, James Chadwick,
iCharles Babbage, George Boole, Alan Turing, Tim Berners-Lee, Paul Dirac,
iStephen Hawking, Peter Higgs, Roger Penrose, John Horton Conway, Thomas
iBayes,
iArthur Cayley, G. H. Hardy, Oliver Heaviside, Andrew Wiles, Edward Jenner,
iFrancis Crick, Joseph Lister, Joseph Priestley, Thomas Young, Christopher
iWren
iand Richard Dawkins. Some experts claim that the earliest concept of a metric
isystem was invented by John Wilkins, the first secretary of the Royal
iSociety,
iin 1668.[152]
i
iEngland was a leading centre of the Scientific Revolution from the 17th
icentury.[153] As the birthplace of the Industrial Revolution, England was
ihome
ito many significant inventors during the late 18th and early 19th centuries.
iFamous English engineers include Isambard Kingdom Brunel, best known for the
icreation of the Great Western Railway, a series of famous steamships, and
inumerous important bridges, hence revolutionising public transport and
imodern-day engineering.[154] Thomas Newcomen's steam engine helped spawn the
iIndustrial Revolution.[155]
i
iThe Father of Railways, George Stephenson, built the first public inter-city
irailway line in the world, the Liverpool and Manchester Railway, which opened
iin 1830. With his role in the marketing and manufacturing of the steam
iengine,
iand invention of modern coinage, Matthew Boulton (business partner of James
iWatt) is regarded as one of the most influential entrepreneurs in
ihistory.[156] The physician Edward Jenner's smallpox vaccine is said to have
i"saved more lives ... than were lost in all the wars of mankind since the
ibeginning of recorded history."[157]
i
iInventions and discoveries of the English include: the jet engine, the first
iindustrial spinning machine, the first computer and the first modern
icomputer,
ithe World Wide Web along with HTML, the first successful human blood
itransfusion, the motorised vacuum cleaner,[159] the lawn mower, the seat
ibelt,
ithe hovercraft, the electric motor, steam engines, and theories such as the
iDarwinian theory of evolution and atomic theory. Newton developed the ideas
iof
iuniversal gravitation, Newtonian mechanics, and calculus, and Robert Hooke
ihis
ieponymously named law of elasticity. Other inventions include the iron plate
irailway, the thermosiphon, tarmac, the rubber band, the mousetrap, "cat's
ieye"
iroad marker, joint development of the light bulb, steam locomotives, the
imodern seed drill and many modern techniques and technologies used in
iprecision engineering.[160]
i
iThe Royal Society, formally The Royal Society of London for Improving Natural
iKnowledge,[161] is a learned society and the United Kingdom's national
iacademy
iof sciences. Founded on 28 November 1660, it was granted a royal charter by
iKing Charles II as "The Royal Society".[161] It is the oldest national
iscientific institution in the world.[162] The society fulfils a number of
iroles: promoting science and its benefits, recognising excellence in science,
isupporting outstanding science, providing scientific advice for policy,
ifostering international and global co-operation, education and public
iengagement.[163]
i
iThe Royal Society started from groups of physicians and natural philosophers,
imeeting at a variety of locations, including Gresham College in London. They
iwere influenced by the "new science", as promoted by Francis Bacon in his New
iAtlantis, from approximately 1645 onwards.[164] A group known as "The
iPhilosophical Society of Oxford" was run under a set of rules still retained
iby the Bodleian Library.[165] After the English Restoration, there were
iregular meetings at Gresham College.[166] It is widely held that these groups
iwere the inspiration for the foundation of the Royal Society.[165]
i
iScientific research and development remains important in the universities of
iEngland, with many establishing science parks to facilitate production and
ico-operation with industry.[167] Between 2004 and 2008 the United Kingdom
iproduced 7 per cent of the world's scientific research papers and had an 8
iper
icent share of scientific citations, the third and second-highest in the world
i(after the United States and China, respectively).[168] Scientific journals
iproduced in England include Nature, the British Medical Journal and The
iLancet. The Department for Science, Innovation and Technology, Secretary of
iState for Science, Innovation and Technology, and Minister of State for
iScience, Research and Innovation has responsibility for science in
iEngland.[169]
i
iThe Department for Transport is the government body responsible for
ioverseeing transport in England. The department is run by the Secretary of
iState for Transport.
i
iEngland has a dense and modern transportation infrastructure. There are many
imotorways in England, and many other trunk roads, such as the A1 Great North
iRoad, which runs through eastern England from London to Newcastle[170] (much
iof this section is motorway) and onward to the Scottish border. The longest
imotorway in England is the M6, from Rugby through the North West up to the
iAnglo-Scottish border, a distance of 232 miles (373 km).[170] Other major
iroutes include: the M1 from London to Leeds, the M25 which encircles London,
ithe M60 which encircles Manchester, the M4 from London to South Wales, the
iM62
ifrom Liverpool via Manchester to East Yorkshire, and the M5 from Birmingham
ito
iBristol and the South West.[170]
i
iBus transport across the country is widespread; major companies include
iArriva, FirstGroup, Go-Ahead Group, National Express, Rotala and Stagecoach
iGroup. The red double-decker buses in London have become a symbol of England.
i
iNational Cycle Route offers cycling routes nationally. There is a rapid
itransit network in two English cities: the London Underground; and the Tyne
iand Wear Metro in Newcastle upon Tyne, Gateshead and Sunderland.[171] There
iare several tram networks, such as the Blackpool tramway, Manchester
iMetrolink, Sheffield Supertram and West Midlands Metro, and the Tramlink
isystem centred on Croydon in South London.[171]
i
iGreat British Railways is a planned state-owned public body that will oversee
irail transport in Great Britain from 2023. The Office of Rail and Road is
iresponsible for the economic and safety regulation of England's
irailways.[172]
i
iRail transport in England is the oldest in the world: passenger railways
ioriginated in England in 1825.[173] Much of Britain's 10,000 miles (16,000
ikm)
iof rail network lies in England, covering the country fairly extensively,
ialthough a high proportion of railway lines were closed in the second half of
ithe 20th century. There are plans to reopen lines such as the Varsity Line
ibetween Oxford and Cambridge. These lines are mostly standard gauge (single,
idouble or quadruple track) though there are also a few narrow gauge lines.
iThere is rail transport access to France and Belgium through an undersea rail
ilink, the Channel Tunnel, which was completed in 1994.
i
iCrossrail was Europe's largest construction project with a £15 billion
iprojected cost, opened in 2022.[174] High Speed 2, a new high-speed
inorth–south railway line, projected in 2015 to cost £56 billion is to start
ibeing built in 2020.[175]
i
iEngland has extensive domestic and international aviation links. The largest
iairport is Heathrow, which is the world's busiest airport measured by number
iof international passengers.[176] Other large airports include Gatwick,
iManchester, Stansted, Luton and Birmingham.[177]
i
iBy sea there is ferry transport, both local and international, including from
iLiverpool to Ireland and the Isle of Man, and Hull to the Netherlands and
iBelgium.[178] There are around 4,400 miles (7,100 km) of navigable waterways
iin England, half of which is owned by the Canal & River Trust,[178] however,
iwater transport is very limited. The River Thames is the major waterway in
iEngland, with imports and exports focused at the Port of Tilbury in the
iThames
iEstuary, one of the United Kingdom's three major ports.[178]
i
iEnergy use in the United Kingdom stood at 2,249 TWh (193.4 million tonnes of
ioil equivalent) in 2014.[181] This equates to energy consumption per capita
iof
i34.82 MWh (3.00 tonnes of oil equivalent) compared to a 2010 world average of
i21.54 MWh (1.85 tonnes of oil equivalent).[182] Demand for electricity in
i2014
iwas 34.42 GW on average[183] (301.7 TWh over the year) coming from a total
ielectricity generation of 335.0 TWh.[184]
i
iSuccessive UK governments have outlined numerous commitments to reduce carbon
idioxide emissions. Notably, the UK is one of the best sites in Europe for
iwind
ienergy, and wind power production is its fastest growing supply.[180] Wind
ipower contributed 15% of UK electricity generation in 2017.[185][186] England
iis home to Hornsea 2, the largest offshore wind farm in the world, situated
iin
iwaters roughly 89 kilometres off the coast of Yorkshire.[187]
i
iThe Climate Change Act 2008 was passed in Parliament with an overwhelming
imajority across political parties. It sets out emission reduction targets
ithat
ithe UK must comply with legally. It represents the first global legally
ibinding climate change mitigation target set by a country.[188] UK government
ienergy policy aims to play a key role in limiting greenhouse gas emissions,
iwhilst meeting energy demand. Shifting availabilities of resources and
idevelopment of technologies also change the country's energy mix through
ichanges in costs.[189]
i
iThe current energy policy is the responsibility of the Department for Energy
iSecurity and Net Zero and Secretary of State for Energy Security and Net
iZero.[190] The Minister of State for Business, Energy and Clean Growth is
iresponsible for green finance, climate science and innovation, and low carbon
igeneration.[191] United Kingdom is ranked 4 out of 180 countries in the
iEnvironmental Performance Index.[192] A law has been passed that UK
igreenhouse
igas emissions will be net zero by 2050.[193]
i
iEnglish Heritage is a governmental body with a broad remit of managing the
ihistoric sites, artefacts and environments of England. It is currently
isponsored by the Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport.[194]
i
iThe National Trust for Places of Historic Interest or Natural Beauty is a
icharity which also maintains multiple sites. Of the 25 United Kingdom UNESCO
iWorld Heritage Sites, 17 are in England.[195]
i
iSome of the best known of these include Stonehenge, Avebury and Associated
iSites, Tower of London, Jurassic Coast, Palace of Westminster, Roman Baths,
iCity of Bath, Saltaire, Ironbridge Gorge, Studley Royal Park and more
irecently
ithe English Lake District. The northernmost point of the Roman Empire,
iHadrian's Wall, is the largest Roman artefact anywhere: it runs for a total
iof
i73 miles (117 kilometres) in northern England.[196]
i
iThe Secretary of State for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport has overall
iresponsibility for tourism, arts and culture, cultural property, heritage and
ihistoric environments, libraries, and museums and galleries.[197] The
iParliamentary Under Secretary of State for Arts, Heritage and Tourism is the
iminister with responsibility over tourism in England.[198]
i
iA blue plaque, the oldest historical marker scheme in the world, is a
ipermanent sign installed in a public place in England to commemorate a link
ibetween that location and a famous person or event. The scheme was the
ibrainchild of politician William Ewart in 1863 and was initiated in 1866. It
iwas formally established by the Royal Society of Arts in 1867, and since 1986
ihas been run by English Heritage. In 2011 there were around 1,600 museums in
iEngland.[199] Entry to most state-supported museums and galleries is free
iunlike in other countries.[200]
i
iLondon is one of the world's most visited cities, regularly taking the top
ifive most visited cities in Europe.[201] It is largely considered a global
icentre of finance, arts and culture.[202]
i
i===== Healthcare =====
i
iThe National Health Service (NHS), is the publicly funded healthcare system
iresponsible for providing the majority of healthcare in the country. The NHS
ibegan on 5 July 1948, putting into effect the provisions of the National
iHealth Service Act 1946. It was based on the findings of the Beveridge
iReport,
iprepared by economist and social reformer William Beveridge.[203] The NHS is
ilargely funded from general taxation including National Insurance
ipayments,[204] and it provides most of its services free at the point of use,
ialthough there are charges for some people for eye tests, dental care,
iprescriptions and aspects of personal care.[205]
i
iThe government department responsible for the NHS is the Department of
iHealth, headed by the Secretary of State for Health, who sits in the British
iCabinet. Most of the expenditure of the Department of Health is spent on the
iNHS—£98.6 billion was spent in 2008–2009.[206] In recent years the private
isector has been increasingly used to provide more NHS services despite
iopposition by doctors and trade unions.[207]
i
iWhen purchasing drugs, the NHS has significant market power that, based on
iits own assessment of the fair value of the drugs, influences the global
iprice, typically keeping prices lower.[208] Several other countries either
icopy the UK's model or directly rely on its assessments for their own
idecisions on state-financed drug reimbursements.[209] Regulatory bodies such
ias the General Medical Council and the Nursing and Midwifery Council are
iorganised on a UK-wide basis, as are non-governmental bodies such as the
iRoyal
iColleges.
i
iThe average life expectancy of people in England is 77.5 years for males and
i81.7 years for females, the highest of the four countries of the United
iKingdom.[210] The South of England has a higher life expectancy than the
iNorth; however, regional differences do seem to be slowly narrowing: between
i1991–1993 and 2012–2014, life expectancy in the North East increased by 6.0
iyears and in the North West by 5.8 years, the fastest increase in any region
ioutside London, and the gap between life expectancy in the North East and
iSouth East is now 2.5 years, down from 2.9 in 1993.[210]
i
i===== Demography =====
i
iWith over 56 million inhabitants, England is by far the most populous country
iof the United Kingdom, accounting for 84% of the combined
itotal.[10]: 12 [211]
iEngland taken as a unit and measured against international states would be
ithe
i25th largest country by population in the world.[212]
i
iThe English people are British people.[213] Some genetic evidence suggests
ithat 75–95% descend in the paternal line from prehistoric settlers who
ioriginally came from the Iberian Peninsula, as well as a 5% contribution from
iAngles and Saxons, and a significant Scandinavian (Viking) element.[214][215]
iHowever, other geneticists place the Germanic estimate up to half.[216] Over
itime, various cultures have been influential: Prehistoric, Brythonic,[217]
iRoman, Anglo-Saxon,[218] Viking (North Germanic),[219] Gaelic cultures, as
iwell as a large influence from Normans. There is an English diaspora in
iformer
iparts of the British Empire; especially the United States, Canada, Australia,
iSouth Africa and New Zealand.[c] Since the late 1990s, many English people
ihave migrated to Spain.[224]
i
iIn 1086, when the Domesday Book was compiled, England had a population of two
imillion. About 10% lived in urban areas.[225] By 1801, the population was 8.3
imillion, and by 1901 30.5 million.[226] Due in particular to the economic
iprosperity of South East England, it has received many economic migrants from
ithe other parts of the United Kingdom.[213] There has been significant Irish
imigration.[227] The proportion of ethnically European residents totals at
i87.50%, including Germans[228] and Poles.[213]
i
iOther people from much further afield in the former British colonies have
iarrived since the 1950s: in particular, 6% of people living in England have
ifamily origins in the Indian subcontinent, mostly India, Pakistan and
iBangladesh.[213][228] About 0.7% of people are Chinese.[213][228] 2.90% of
ithe
ipopulation are black, from Africa and the Caribbean, especially former
iBritish
icolonies.[213][228] In 2007, 22% of primary school children in England were
ifrom ethnic minority families,[229] and in 2011 that figure was 26.5%.[230]
iAbout half of the population increase between 1991 and 2001 was due to
iimmigration.[231] Debate over immigration is politically prominent;[232] 80%
iof respondents in a 2009 Home Office poll wanted to cap it.[233] The ONS has
iprojected that the population will grow by nine million between 2014 and
i2039.[234]
i
iEngland contains one indigenous national minority, the Cornish people,
irecognised by the UK government under the Framework Convention for the
iProtection of National Minorities in 2014.[235]
i
i(thousands) [236]
i
iEnglish, today spoken by hundreds of millions of people around the world,
ioriginated in what is now England, where it remains the principal tongue.
iAccording to a 2011 census, it is spoken well or very well by 98% of the
ipopulation.[237] It is an Indo-European language in the Anglo-Frisian branch
iof the Germanic family.[238] After the Norman conquest, the Old English
ilanguage, brought to Britain by the Anglo-Saxon settlers, was confined to the
ilower social classes as Norman French and Latin were used by the aristocracy.
i
iBy the 15th century, English was back in fashion among all classes, though
imuch changed; the Middle English form showed many signs of French influence,
iboth in vocabulary and spelling. During the English Renaissance, many words
iwere coined from Latin and Greek origins.[239] Modern English has extended
ithis custom of flexibility when it comes to incorporating words from
idifferent
ilanguages. Thanks in large part to the British Empire, the English language
iis
ithe world's unofficial lingua franca.[240]
i
iEnglish language learning and teaching is an important economic activity, and
iincludes language schooling, tourism spending, and publishing. There is no
ilegislation mandating an official language for England,[241] but English is
ithe only language used for official business. Despite the country's
irelatively
ismall size, there are many distinct regional accents, and individuals with
iparticularly strong accents may not be easily understood everywhere in the
icountry.
i
iAs well as English, England has two other indigenous languages, Cornish and
iWelsh. Cornish died out as a community language in the 18th century but is
ibeing revived,[242] and is now protected under the European Charter for
iRegional or Minority Languages.[243] It is spoken by 0.1% of people in
iCornwall,[244] and is taught to some degree in several primary and secondary
ischools.[245]
i
iWhen the modern border between Wales and England was established by the Laws
iin Wales Acts 1535 and 1542, many Welsh-speaking communities found themselves
ion the English side of the border. Welsh was spoken in Archenfield in
iHerefordshire into the nineteenth century,[246] and by natives of parts of
iwestern Shropshire until the middle of the twentieth century if not
ilater.[247]
i
iState schools teach students a second language or third language from the
iages of seven, most commonly French, Spanish or German.[248] It was reported
iin 2007 that around 800,000 school students spoke a foreign language at home
ias a result of immigration among their family,[229] the most common languages
ibeing Punjabi and Urdu. However, following the 2011 census data released by
ithe Office for National Statistics, figures now show that Polish is the main
ilanguage spoken in England after English.[249]
i
iIn 2022, British Sign Language became an official language of England (as
iwell as the rest of the United Kingdom) when the British Sign Language Act
i2022 came into effect.[250]
i
iIn the 2011 census, 59.4% of the population of England specified their
ireligion as Christian, 24.7% answered that they had no religion, 5% specified
ithat they were Muslim, while 3.7% of the population belongs to other
ireligions
iand 7.2% did not give an answer.[251] Christianity is the most widely
ipractised religion in England, as it has been since the Early Middle Ages,
ialthough it was first introduced much earlier in Gaelic and Roman times. This
iCeltic Church was gradually joined to the Catholic hierarchy following the
i6th-century Gregorian mission to Kent led by St Augustine. The established
ichurch of England is the Church of England,[252] which left communion with
iRome in the 1530s when Henry VIII was unable to annul his marriage to the
iaunt
iof the king of Spain. The church regards itself as both Catholic and
iProtestant.[253]
i
iThere are High Church and Low Church traditions and some Anglicans regard
ithemselves as Anglo-Catholics, following the Tractarian movement. The monarch
iof the United Kingdom is the supreme governor of the Church of England, which
ihas around 26 million baptised members (of whom the vast majority are not
iregular churchgoers). It forms part of the Anglican Communion with the
iArchbishop of Canterbury acting as its symbolic worldwide head.[254] Many
icathedrals and parish churches are historic buildings of significant
iarchitectural importance, such as Westminster Abbey, York Minster, Durham
iCathedral, and Salisbury Cathedral.
i
iThe 2nd-largest Christian practice is the Latin Rite of the Catholic Church.
iSince its reintroduction after the Catholic Emancipation, the Church has
iorganised ecclesiastically on an England and Wales basis where there are 4.5
imillion members (most of whom are English).[255] There has been one Pope from
iEngland to date, Adrian IV; while saints Bede and Anselm are regarded as
iDoctors of the Church.
i
iA form of Protestantism known as Methodism is the third largest Christian
ipractice and grew out of Anglicanism through John Wesley.[256] It gained
ipopularity in the mill towns of Lancashire and Yorkshire, and amongst tin
iminers in Cornwall.[257] There are other non-conformist minorities, such as
iBaptists, Quakers, Congregationalists, Unitarians and The Salvation
iArmy.[258]
i
iThe patron saint of England is Saint George; his symbolic cross is included
iin the flag of England, as well as in the Union Flag as part of a
icombination.[259] There are many other English and associated saints; some of
ithe best-known are: Cuthbert, Edmund, Alban, Wilfrid, Aidan, Edward the
iConfessor, John Fisher, Thomas More, Petroc, Piran, Margaret Clitherow and
iThomas Becket. There are non-Christian religions practised. Jews have a
ihistory of a small minority on the island since 1070.[260] They were expelled
ifrom England in 1290 following the Edict of Expulsion, only to be allowed
iback
iin 1656.[260]
i
iEspecially since the 1950s, religions from the former British colonies have
igrown in numbers, due to immigration. Islam is the most common of these, now
iaccounting for around 5% of the population in England.[261] Hinduism, Sikhism
iand Buddhism are next in number, adding up to 2.8% combined,[261] introduced
ifrom India and South East Asia.[261]
i
iA small minority of the population practise ancient Pagan religions.
iNeopaganism in the United Kingdom is primarily represented by Wicca and
iWitchcraft religions, Druidry, and Heathenry. According to the 2011 UK
iCensus,
ithere are roughly 53,172 people who identify as Pagan in England,[d] and
i3,448
iin Wales,[d] including 11,026 Wiccans in England and 740 in Wales.[e]
i
i24.7% of people in England declared no religion in 2011, compared with 14.6%
iin 2001. These figures are slightly lower than the combined figures for
iEngland and Wales as Wales has a higher level of irreligion than
iEngland.[262]
iNorwich had the highest such proportion at 42.5%, followed closely by
iBrighton
iand Hove at 42.4%.
i
i===== Education =====
i
iThe Department for Education is the government department responsible for
iissues affecting people in England up to the age of 19, including
ieducation.[263] State-run and state-funded schools are attended by
iapproximately 93% of English schoolchildren.[264] Education is the
iresponsibility of the Secretary of State for Education.[265]
i
iChildren who are between the ages of 3 and 5 attend nursery or an Early Years
iFoundation Stage reception unit within a primary school. Children between the
iages of 5 and 11 attend primary school, and secondary school is attended by
ithose aged between 11 and 16. State-funded schools are obliged by law to
iteach
ithe National Curriculum; basic areas of learning include English literature,
iEnglish language, mathematics, science, art & design, citizenship, history,
igeography, religious education, design & technology, computing, ancient &
imodern languages, music, and physical education.[266]
i
iMore than 90% of English schools require students to wear uniforms.[267]
iSchool uniforms are defined by individual schools, within the constraint that
iuniform regulations must not discriminate on the grounds of sex, race,
idisability, sexual orientation, gender reassignment, religion or belief.
iSchools may choose to permit trousers for girls or religious dress.[268]
i
iThe Programme for International Student Assessment coordinated by the OECD
icurrently ranks the overall knowledge and skills of British 15-year-olds as
i13th in the world in reading literacy, mathematics, and science with the
iaverage British student scoring 503.7, compared with the OECD average of 493,
iahead of the United States and most of Europe.[269]
i
iAlthough most English secondary schools are comprehensive, there are
iselective intake grammar schools to which entrance is subject to passing the
ieleven-plus exam. Around 7.2 per cent of English schoolchildren attend
iprivate
ischools, which are funded by private sources.[270] Standards in state schools
iare monitored by the Office for Standards in Education, and in private
ischools
iby the Independent Schools Inspectorate.[271]
i
iAfter finishing compulsory education, students take GCSE examinations.
iStudents may then opt to continue into further education for two years.
iFurther education colleges (particularly sixth form colleges) often form part
iof a secondary school site. A-level examinations are sat by a large number of
ifurther education students, and often form the basis of an application to
iuniversity. Further education (FE) covers a wide curriculum of study and
iapprenticeships, including T-levels, BTEC, NVQ and others. Tertiary colleges
iprovide both academic and vocational courses.[272]
i
iHigher education students normally attend university from age 18 onwards,
iwhere they study for an academic degree. There are over 90 universities in
iEngland, all but one of which are public institutions. The Department for
iBusiness, Innovation and Skills is the government department responsible for
ihigher education in England.[273] Students are generally entitled to student
iloans to cover the cost of tuition fees and living costs.[f] The first degree
ioffered to undergraduates is the bachelor's degree, which usually takes three
iyears to complete. Students are then able to work towards a postgraduate
idegree, which usually takes one year, or towards a doctorate, which takes
ithree or more years.[274]
i
iEngland's universities include some of the highest-ranked universities in the
iworld. As of 2023, four England-based universities, the University of
iCambridge, University of Oxford, Imperial College London, and University
iCollege London, are each ranked among the top ten universities in the world
iin
ithe 2023 QS World University Rankings. The University of Cambridge, founded
iin
i1209, and the University of Oxford, founded in 1096, are the two oldest
iuniversities in the English-speaking world.[275]
i
iThe London School of Economics has been described as the world's leading
isocial science institution for both teaching and research.[276] The London
iBusiness School is considered one of the world's leading business schools and
iin 2010 its MBA programme was ranked best in the world by the Financial
iTimes.[277] Academic degrees in England are usually split into classes: first
iclass (1st), upper second class (2:1), lower second class (2:2), third (3rd),
iand unclassified.[274]
i
iThe King's School, Canterbury and King's School, Rochester are the oldest
ischools in the English-speaking world.[278] Many of England's most well-known
ischools, such as Winchester College, Eton, St Paul's School, Harrow School
iand
iRugby School are fee-paying institutions.[279]
i
i===== Culture =====
i
iMany ancient standing stone monuments were erected during the prehistoric
iperiod; amongst the best known are Stonehenge, Devil's Arrows, Rudston
iMonolith and Castlerigg.[280] With the introduction of Ancient Roman
iarchitecture there was a development of basilicas, baths, amphitheaters,
itriumphal arches, villas, Roman temples, Roman roads, Roman forts, stockades
iand aqueducts.[281] It was the Romans who founded the first cities and towns
isuch as London, Bath, York, Chester and St Albans. Perhaps the best-known
iexample is Hadrian's Wall stretching right across northern England.[281]
iAnother well-preserved example is the Roman Baths at Bath, Somerset.[281]
i
iEarly Medieval architecture's secular buildings were simple constructions
imainly using timber with thatch for roofing. Ecclesiastical architecture
iranged from a synthesis of Hiberno–Saxon monasticism,[282][283] to Early
iChristian basilica and architecture characterised by pilaster-strips, blank
iarcading, baluster shafts and triangular headed openings. After the Norman
iconquest in 1066 various castles in England were created so law lords could
iuphold their authority and in the north to protect from invasion. Some of the
ibest-known medieval castles are the Tower of London, Warwick Castle, Durham
iCastle and Windsor Castle.[284]
i
iThroughout the Plantagenet era, an English Gothic architecture flourished,
iwith prime examples including the medieval cathedrals such as Canterbury
iCathedral, Westminster Abbey and York Minster.[284] Expanding on the Norman
ibase there was also castles, palaces, great houses, universities and parish
ichurches. Medieval architecture was completed with the 16th-century Tudor
istyle; the four-centred arch, now known as the Tudor arch, was a defining
ifeature as were wattle and daub houses domestically. In the aftermath of the
iRenaissance a form of architecture echoing classical antiquity synthesised
iwith Christianity appeared, the English Baroque style of architect
iChristopher
iWren being particularly championed.[285]
i
iGeorgian architecture followed in a more refined style, evoking a simple
iPalladian form; the Royal Crescent at Bath is one of the best examples of
ithis. With the emergence of romanticism during Victorian period, a Gothic
iRevival was launched. In addition to this, around the same time the
iIndustrial
iRevolution paved the way for buildings such as The Crystal Palace. Since the
i1930s various modernist forms have appeared whose reception is often
icontroversial, though traditionalist resistance movements continue with
isupport in influential places.[g]
i
iLandscape gardening, as developed by Capability Brown, set an international
itrend for the English garden. Gardening, and visiting gardens, are regarded
ias
itypically English pursuits. The English garden presented an idealized view of
inature. At large country houses, the English garden usually included lakes,
isweeps of gently rolling lawns set against groves of trees, and recreations
iof
iclassical temples, Gothic ruins, bridges, and other picturesque architecture,
idesigned to recreate an idyllic pastoral landscape.[288]
i
iBy the end of the 18th century, the English garden was being imitated by the
iFrench landscape garden, and as far away as St. Petersburg, Russia, in
iPavlovsk, the gardens of the future Emperor Paul. It also had a major
iinfluence on the form of the public parks and gardens which appeared around
ithe world in the 19th century.[289] The English landscape garden was centred
ion the English country house and manor houses.[288]
i
iEnglish Heritage and the National Trust preserve great gardens and landscape
iparks throughout the country.[290] The RHS Chelsea Flower Show is held every
iyear by the Royal Horticultural Society and is said to be the largest
igardening show in the world.[291]
i
iEnglish folklore developed over many centuries. Some of the characters and
istories are present across England, but most belong to specific regions.
iCommon folkloric beings include pixies, giants, elves, bogeymen, trolls,
igoblins and dwarves. While many legends and folk-customs are thought to be
iancient, such as the tales featuring Offa of Angel and Wayland the
iSmith,[292]
iothers date from after the Norman invasion. The legends featuring Robin Hood
iand his Merry Men of Sherwood, and their battles with the Sheriff of
iNottingham, are among the best-known of these.[293]
i
iDuring the High Middle Ages tales originating from Brythonic traditions
ientered English folklore and developed into the Arthurian
imyth.[294][295][296]
iThese were derived from Anglo-Norman, Welsh and French sources,[295]
ifeaturing
iKing Arthur, Camelot, Excalibur, Merlin and the Knights of the Round Table
isuch as Lancelot. These stories are most centrally brought together within
iGeoffrey of Monmouth's Historia Regum Britanniae (History of the Kings of
iBritain).[h] Another early figure from British tradition, King Cole, may have
ibeen based on a real figure from Sub-Roman Britain. Many of the tales and
ipseudo-histories make up part of the wider Matter of Britain, a collection of
ishared British folklore.
i
iSome folk figures are based on semi or actual historical people whose story
ihas been passed down centuries; Lady Godiva for instance was said to have
iridden naked on horseback through Coventry, Hereward the Wake was a heroic
iEnglish figure resisting the Norman invasion, Herne the Hunter is an
iequestrian ghost associated with Windsor Forest and Great Park and Mother
iShipton is the archetypal witch.[298] On 5 November people make bonfires, set
ioff fireworks and eat toffee apples in commemoration of the foiling of the
iGunpowder Plot centred on Guy Fawkes. The chivalrous bandit, such as Dick
iTurpin, is a recurring character, while Blackbeard is the archetypal pirate.
iThere are various national and regional folk activities, participated in to
ithis day, such as Morris dancing, Maypole dancing, Rapper sword in the North
iEast, Long Sword dance in Yorkshire, Mummers Plays, bottle-kicking in
iLeicestershire, and cheese-rolling at Cooper's Hill.[299] There is no
iofficial
inational costume, but a few are well established such as the Pearly Kings and
iQueens associated with cockneys, the Royal Guard, the Morris costume and
iBeefeaters.[300]
i
iSince the early modern period the food of England has historically been
icharacterised by its simplicity of approach and a reliance on the high
iquality
iof natural produce.[301] During the Middle Ages and through the Renaissance
iperiod, English cuisine enjoyed an excellent reputation, though a decline
ibegan during the Industrial Revolution with the move away from the land and
iincreasing urbanisation of the populace. The cuisine of England has, however,
irecently undergone a revival, which has been recognised by food critics with
isome good ratings in Restaurant's best restaurant in the world charts.[302]
iAn
iearly book of English recipes is the Forme of Cury from the royal court of
iRichard II.[303]
i
iTraditional examples of English food include the Sunday roast, featuring a
iroasted joint (usually beef, lamb, chicken or pork) served with assorted
ivegetables, Yorkshire pudding and gravy.[304] Other prominent meals include
ifish and chips and the full English breakfast (generally consisting of bacon,
isausages, grilled tomatoes, fried bread, black pudding, baked beans,
imushrooms
iand eggs).[305] Various meat pies are consumed, such as steak and kidney pie,
isteak and ale pie, cottage pie, pork pie (usually eaten cold)[304] and the
iCornish pasty.
i
iSausages are commonly eaten, either as bangers and mash or toad in the hole.
iLancashire hotpot is a well-known stew originating in the northwest. Some of
ithe more popular cheeses are Cheddar, Red Leicester, Wensleydale, Double
iGloucester and Blue Stilton. Many Anglo-Indian hybrid dishes, curries, have
ibeen created, such as chicken tikka masala and balti. Traditional English
idessert dishes include apple pie or other fruit pies; spotted dick – all
igenerally served with custard; and, more recently, sticky toffee pudding.
iSweet pastries include scones (either plain or containing dried fruit) served
iwith jam or cream, dried fruit loaves, Eccles cakes and mince pies as well as
ia wide range of sweet or spiced biscuits.
i
iCommon non-alcoholic drinks include tea, the popularity of which was
iincreased by Catherine of Braganza,[306] and coffee; frequently consumed
ialcoholic drinks include wine, ciders and English beers, such as bitter,
imild,
istout and brown ale.[307]
i
iThe earliest known examples are the prehistoric rock and cave art pieces,
imost prominent in North Yorkshire, Northumberland and Cumbria, but also
ifeature further south, for example at Creswell Crags.[308] With the arrival
iof
iRoman culture in the 1st century, various forms of art such as statues,
ibusts,
iglasswork and mosaics were the norm. There are numerous surviving artefacts,
isuch as those at Lullingstone and Aldborough.[309] During the Early Middle
iAges the style favoured sculpted crosses and ivories, manuscript painting,
igold and enamel jewellery, demonstrating a love of intricate, interwoven
idesigns such as in the Staffordshire Hoard discovered in 2009. Some of these
iblended Gaelic and Anglian styles, such as the Lindisfarne Gospels and
iVespasian Psalter.[310] Later Gothic art was popular at Winchester and
iCanterbury, examples survive such as Benedictional of St. Æthelwold and
iLuttrell Psalter.[311]
i
iThe Tudor era saw prominent artists as part of their court, portrait painting
iwhich would remain an enduring part of English art, was boosted by German
iHans
iHolbein, natives such as Nicholas Hilliard built on this.[311] Under the
iStuarts, Continental artists were influential especially the Flemish,
iexamples
ifrom the period include Anthony van Dyck, Peter Lely, Godfrey Kneller and
iWilliam Dobson.[311] The 18th century was a time of significance with the
ifounding of the Royal Academy, a classicism based on the High Renaissance
iprevailed, with Thomas Gainsborough and Joshua Reynolds becoming two of
iEngland's most treasured artists.[311]
i
iIn the 19th century, John Constable and J. M. W. Turner were major landscape
iartists. The Norwich School continued the landscape tradition, while the
iPre-Raphaelite Brotherhood, led by artists such as Holman Hunt, Dante Gabriel
iRossetti and John Everett Millais, revived the Early Renaissance style with
itheir vivid and detailed style.[311] Prominent amongst 20th-century artists
iwas Henry Moore, regarded as the voice of British sculpture, and of British
imodernism in general.[312] More recent painters include Lucian Freud, whose
iwork Benefits Supervisor Sleeping in 2008 set a world record for sale value
iof
ia painting by a then-living artist.[313] The Royal Society of Arts is an
iorganisation committed to the arts and culture.[314]
i
iEarly authors such as Bede and Alcuin wrote in Latin.[315] The period of Old
iEnglish literature provided the epic poem Beowulf and the secular prose of
ithe
iAnglo-Saxon Chronicle,[316] along with Christian writings such as Judith,
iCædmon's Hymn and hagiographies.[315] Following the Norman conquest Latin
icontinued amongst the educated classes, as well as an Anglo-Norman
iliterature.
i
iMiddle English literature emerged with Geoffrey Chaucer, author of The
iCanterbury Tales, along with Gower, the Pearl Poet and Langland. William of
iOckham and Roger Bacon, who were Franciscans, were major philosophers of the
iMiddle Ages. Julian of Norwich, who wrote Revelations of Divine Love, was a
iprominent Christian mystic. With the English Renaissance literature in the
iEarly Modern English style appeared. William Shakespeare, whose works include
iHamlet, Romeo and Juliet, Macbeth, and A Midsummer Night's Dream, remains one
iof the most championed authors in English literature.[317]
i
iChristopher Marlowe, Edmund Spenser, Philip Sydney, Thomas Kyd, John Donne,
iand Ben Jonson are other established authors of the Elizabethan age.[318]
iFrancis Bacon and Thomas Hobbes wrote on empiricism and materialism,
iincluding
iscientific method and social contract.[318] Filmer wrote on the Divine Right
iof Kings. Marvell was the best-known poet of the Commonwealth,[319] while
iJohn
iMilton authored Paradise Lost during the Restoration.
i
iThis royal throne of kings, this sceptred isle, this earth of majesty, this
iseat of Mars, this other Eden, demi-paradise; this fortress, built by nature
ifor herself. This blessed plot, this earth, this realm, this England.
i
iWilliam Shakespeare.[320]
i
iSome of the most prominent philosophers of the Enlightenment were John Locke,
iThomas Paine, Samuel Johnson and Jeremy Bentham. More radical elements were
ilater countered by Edmund Burke who is regarded as the founder of
iconservatism.[321] The poet Alexander Pope with his satirical verse became
iwell regarded. The English played a significant role in romanticism: Samuel
iTaylor Coleridge, Lord Byron, John Keats, Mary Shelley, Percy Bysshe Shelley,
iWilliam Blake and William Wordsworth were major figures.[322]
i
iIn response to the Industrial Revolution, agrarian writers sought a way
ibetween liberty and tradition; William Cobbett, G. K. Chesterton and Hilaire
iBelloc were main exponents, while the founder of guild socialism, Arthur
iPenty, and cooperative movement advocate G. D. H. Cole are somewhat
irelated.[323] Empiricism continued through John Stuart Mill and Bertrand
iRussell, while Bernard Williams was involved in analytics. Authors from
iaround
ithe Victorian era include Charles Dickens, the Brontë sisters, Jane Austen,
iGeorge Eliot, Rudyard Kipling, Thomas Hardy, H. G. Wells and Lewis
iCarroll.[324] Since then England has continued to produce novelists such as
iGeorge Orwell, D. H. Lawrence, Virginia Woolf, C. S. Lewis, Enid Blyton,
iAldous Huxley, Agatha Christie, Terry Pratchett, J. R. R. Tolkien, and J. K.
iRowling.[325]
i
iThe traditional folk music of England is centuries old and has contributed to
iseveral genres prominently; mostly sea shanties, jigs, hornpipes and dance
imusic. It has its own distinct variations and regional peculiarities. Ballads
ifeaturing Robin Hood, printed by Wynkyn de Worde in the 16th century, are an
iimportant artefact, as are John Playford's The Dancing Master and Robert
iHarley's Roxburghe Ballads collections.[326] Some of the best-known songs are
iGreensleeves, Pastime with Good Company, Maggie May and Spanish Ladies
iamongst
iothers. Many nursery rhymes are of English origin such as Mary, Mary, Quite
iContrary, Roses Are Red, Jack and Jill, London Bridge Is Falling Down, The
iGrand Old Duke of York, Hey Diddle Diddle and Humpty Dumpty.[327] Traditional
iEnglish Christmas carols include "We Wish You a Merry Christmas", "The First
iNoel", "I Saw Three Ships" and "God Rest You Merry, Gentlemen".[328]
i
iEarly English composers in classical music include Renaissance artists Thomas
iTallis and William Byrd, followed up by Henry Purcell from the Baroque period
iand Thomas Arne who was well known for his patriotic song Rule, Britannia!.
iGerman-born George Frideric Handel spent most of his composing life in London
iand became a national icon in Britain, creating some of the most well-known
iworks of classical music, especially his English oratorios, The Messiah,
iSolomon, Water Music, and Music for the Royal Fireworks.[329] One of his four
iCoronation Anthems, Zadok the Priest, composed for the coronation of George
iII, has been performed at every subsequent British coronation, traditionally
iduring the sovereign's anointing.
i
iClassical music attracted much attention from 1784 with the formation of the
iBirmingham Triennial Music Festival, which was the longest running classical
imusic festival of its kind until the final concerts in 1912. The English
iMusical Renaissance was a hypothetical development in the late 19th and early
i20th century, when English composers, often those lecturing or trained at the
iRoyal College of Music, were said to have freed themselves from foreign
imusical influences. There was a revival in the profile of composers from
iEngland in the 20th century led by Edward Elgar, Benjamin Britten, Frederick
iDelius, Gustav Holst, Ralph Vaughan Williams and others.[330] Present-day
icomposers from England include Michael Nyman, best known for The Piano, and
iAndrew Lloyd Webber, whose musicals have achieved enormous success in the
iWest
iEnd and worldwide.[331]
i
iIn popular music, many English bands and solo artists have been cited as the
imost influential and best-selling musicians of all time. Acts such as The
iBeatles, Led Zeppelin, Pink Floyd, Elton John, Queen, Rod Stewart, David
iBowie, The Rolling Stones and Def Leppard are among the highest-selling
irecording artists in the world.[333] Many musical genres have origins in (or
istrong associations with) England, such as British invasion, progressive
irock,
ihard rock, Mod, glam rock, heavy metal, Britpop, indie rock, gothic rock,
ishoegazing, acid house, garage, trip hop, drum and bass and dubstep.[334]
i
iLarge outdoor music festivals in the summer and autumn are popular, such as
iGlastonbury, V Festival, and the Reading and Leeds Festivals. England was at
ithe forefront of the illegal, free rave movement from the late 1980s, which
iled to pan-European culture of teknivals mirrored on the UK free festival
imovement and associated travelling lifestyle.[335] The Boishakhi Mela is a
iBengali New Year festival celebrated by the British Bangladeshi community. It
iis the largest open-air Asian festival in Europe. After the Notting Hill
iCarnival, it is the second-largest street festival in the United Kingdom
iattracting over 80,000 visitors from across the country.[336]
i
iThe most prominent opera house in England is the Royal Opera House at Covent
iGarden.[337] The Proms – a season of orchestral classical concerts held
iprimarily at the Royal Albert Hall in London – is a major cultural event in
ithe English calendar, and takes place yearly.[337] The Royal Ballet is one of
ithe world's foremost classical ballet companies, its reputation built on two
iprominent figures of 20th-century dance, prima ballerina Margot Fonteyn and
ichoreographer Frederick Ashton. The Royal Academy of Music is the oldest
iconservatoire in England, founded in 1822. It received its royal charter in
i1830 from King George IV.[338] England is home to numerous major orchestras
isuch as the BBC Symphony Orchestra, the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra, the
iPhilharmonia Orchestra, and the London Symphony Orchestra.[339]
i
iThe circus is a traditional form of entertainment in England. Chipperfield's
iCircus dates back more than 300 years, making it one of the oldest family
icircus dynasties.[340] Philip Astley is regarded as the father of the modern
icircus.[341] Following his invention of the circus ring in 1768, Astley's
iAmphitheatre opened in London in 1773.[341][342] As an equestrian master
iAstley had a skill for trick horse-riding, and when he added tumblers,
itightrope-walkers, jugglers, performing dogs, and a clown to fill time
ibetween
ihis own demonstrations – the modern circus was born.[343][344]
i
iPantomime is a British musical comedy stage production, designed for family
ientertainment. It is performed in theatres throughout England during the
iChristmas and New Year season. The art originated in the 18th century with
iJohn Weaver, a dance master and choreographer.[345] In 19th century England
iit
iacquired its present form, which includes songs, slapstick comedy and
idancing,
iemploying gender-crossing actors, combining topical humour with a story
iloosely based on a well-known fairy tale.[345]
i
iEngland (and the UK as a whole) has had a considerable influence on the
ihistory of the cinema, producing some of the greatest actors, directors and
imotion pictures of all time, including Alfred Hitchcock, Charlie Chaplin,
iDavid Lean, Laurence Olivier, Vivien Leigh, John Gielgud, Peter Sellers,
iJulie
iAndrews, Michael Caine, Gary Oldman, Helen Mirren, Kate Winslet and Daniel
iDay-Lewis. Hitchcock and Lean are among the most critically acclaimed
ifilmmakers.[347] Hitchcock's first thriller, The Lodger: A Story of the
iLondon
iFog (1926), helped shape the thriller genre in film, while his 1929 film,
iBlackmail, is often regarded as the first British sound feature film.[348]
i
iMajor film studios in England include Pinewood, Elstree and Shepperton. Some
iof the most commercially successful films of all time have been produced in
iEngland, including two of the highest-grossing film franchises (Harry Potter
iand James Bond).[349] Ealing Studios in London has a claim to being the
ioldest
icontinuously working film studio in the world.[350] Famous for recording many
imotion picture film scores, the London Symphony Orchestra first performed
ifilm
imusic in 1935.[351] The Hammer Horror films starring Christopher Lee saw the
iproduction of the first gory horror films showing blood and guts in
icolour.[352]
i
iThe BFI Top 100 British films includes Monty Python's Life of Brian (1979), a
ifilm regularly voted the funniest of all time by the UK public.[353] English
iproducers are also active in international co-productions and English actors,
idirectors and crew feature regularly in American films. The UK film council
iranked David Yates, Christopher Nolan, Mike Newell, Ridley Scott and Paul
iGreengrass the five most commercially successful English directors since
i2001.[354] Other contemporary English directors include Sam Mendes, Guy
iRitchie and Richard Curtis. Current actors include Tom Hardy, Daniel Craig,
iBenedict Cumberbatch, Lena Headey, Felicity Jones, Emilia Clarke, Lashana
iLynch, and Emma Watson. Acclaimed for his motion capture work, Andy Serkis
iopened The Imaginarium Studios in London in 2011.[355] The visual effects
icompany Framestore in London has produced some of the most critically
iacclaimed special effects in modern film.[356] Many successful Hollywood
ifilms
ihave been based on English people, stories or events. The 'English Cycle' of
iDisney animated films include Alice in Wonderland, The Jungle Book and Winnie
ithe Pooh.[357]
i
iEnglish Heritage is a governmental body with a broad remit of managing the
ihistoric sites, artefacts and environments of England. It is currently
isponsored by the Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport. The
icharity
iNational Trust for Places of Historic Interest or Natural Beauty holds a
icontrasting role. 17 of the 25 United Kingdom UNESCO World Heritage Sites
ifall
iwithin England.[358] Some of the best-known of these are: Hadrian's Wall,
iStonehenge, Avebury and Associated Sites, Tower of London, Jurassic Coast,
iSaltaire, Ironbridge Gorge, Studley Royal Park and various others.[359]
i
iThere are many museums in England, but perhaps the most notable is London's
iBritish Museum. Its collection of more than seven million objects[360] is one
iof the largest and most comprehensive in the world,[361] sourced from every
icontinent, illustrating and documenting the story of human culture from its
ibeginning to the present. The British Library in London is the national
ilibrary and is one of the world's largest research libraries, holding over
i150
imillion items in almost all known languages and formats; including around 25
imillion books.[362][363] The most senior art gallery is the National Gallery
iin Trafalgar Square, which houses a collection of over 2,300 paintings dating
ifrom the mid-13th century to 1900.[364] The Tate galleries house the national
icollections of British and international modern art; they also host the
ifamously controversial Turner Prize.[365]
i
i===== Media =====
i
iThe BBC, founded in 1922, is the UK's publicly funded radio, television and
iInternet broadcasting corporation, and is the oldest and largest broadcaster
iin the world.[366][367] It operates numerous television and radio stations in
ithe UK and abroad and its domestic services are funded by the television
ilicence.[368][369] The BBC World Service is an international broadcaster
iowned
iand operated by the BBC. It is the world's largest of any kind.[370] It
ibroadcasts radio news, speech and discussions in more than 40
ilanguages.[371][372]
i
iLondon dominates the media sector in England: national newspapers and
itelevision and radio are largely based there, although Manchester is also a
isignificant national media centre. The UK publishing sector, including books,
idirectories and databases, journals, magazines and business media, newspapers
iand news agencies, has a combined turnover of around £20 billion and employs
iaround 167,000 people.[373] National newspapers produced in England include
iThe Times, The Guardian and the Financial Times.[374]
i
iMagazines and journals published in England that have achieved worldwide
icirculation include Nature, New Scientist, The Spectator, Prospect, NME and
iThe Economist. The Secretary of State for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport
ihas overall responsibility over media and broadcasting in England.[375]
i
i===== Sport =====
i
iEngland has a strong sporting heritage, and during the 19th century codified
imany sports that are now played around the world. Sports originating in
iEngland include association football,[376] cricket, rugby union, rugby
ileague,
itennis, boxing, badminton, squash,[377] rounders,[378] hockey, snooker,
ibilliards, darts, table tennis, bowls, netball, thoroughbred horseracing,
igreyhound racing and fox hunting. It has helped the development of golf,
isailing and Formula One.
i
iFootball is the most popular of these sports. The England national football
iteam, whose home venue is Wembley Stadium, played Scotland in the first ever
iinternational football match in 1872.[379] Referred to as the "home of
ifootball" by FIFA, England hosted the 1966 FIFA World Cup, and won the
itournament by defeating West Germany 4–2 in the final, with Geoff Hurst
iscoring a hat-trick.[380] With a British television audience peak of 32.30
imillion viewers, the final is the most watched television event ever in the
iUK.[381]
i
iAt club level, England is recognised by FIFA as the birthplace of club
ifootball, due to Sheffield F.C. founded in 1857 being the world's oldest
iclub.[376] The Football Association is the oldest governing body in the
isport,
iwith the rules of football first drafted in 1863 by Ebenezer Cobb
iMorley.[382]
iThe FA Cup and The Football League were the first cup and league competitions
irespectively. In the modern day, the Premier League is the world's
imost-watched football league,[383] most lucrative,[384] and amongst the
ielite.[385]
i
iAs is the case throughout the UK, football in England is notable for the
irivalries between clubs and the passion of the supporters, which includes a
itradition of football chants.[386] The most successful English football team
iin the European Cup/UEFA Champions League is Liverpool F.C., who have won the
icompetition on six occasions.[387] Other English success has come from
iManchester United, winning the competition on three occasions, Nottingham
iForest and Chelsea on two occasions each, and Aston Villa and Manchester City
ionce each.[388]
i
iCricket is generally thought to have been developed in the early medieval
iperiod among the farming and metalworking communities of the Weald.[390] The
iEngland cricket team is a composite England and Wales, team. One of the
igame's
itop rivalries is The Ashes series between England and Australia, contested
isince 1882. The climax of the 2005 Ashes was viewed by 7.4 million as it was
iavailable on terrestrial television.[391] England has hosted five Cricket
iWorld Cups (1975, 1979, 1983, 1999 and 2019), winning the 2019 edition in a
ifinal regarded as one of the greatest one day internationals ever
iplayed.[392]
iThey hosted the ICC World Twenty20 in 2009, winning this format in 2010
ibeating rivals Australia in the final. In the domestic competition, the
iCounty
iChampionship, Yorkshire are by far the most successful club having won the
icompetition 32 times outright and sharing it on 1 other occasion.[393] Lord's
iCricket Ground situated in London is sometimes referred to as the "Mecca of
iCricket".[394]
i
iWilliam Penny Brookes was prominent in organising the format for the modern
iOlympic Games. In 1994, then President of the IOC, Juan Antonio Samaranch,
ilaid a wreath on Brooke's grave, and said, "I came to pay homage and tribute
ito Dr Brookes, who really was the founder of the modern Olympic Games".[395]
iLondon has hosted the Summer Olympic Games three times, in 1908, 1948, and
i2012. England competes in the Commonwealth Games, held every four years.
iSport
iEngland is the governing body responsible for distributing funds and
iproviding
istrategic guidance for sporting activity in England. The Minister for Sport
iand Civil Society has responsibility for sport in England.[396]
i
iRugby union originated in Rugby School, Warwickshire in the early 19th
icentury.[397] The England rugby union team won the 2003 Rugby World Cup, with
iJonny Wilkinson scoring the winning drop goal in the last minute of extra
itime
iagainst Australia. England was one of the host nations of the competition in
ithe 1991 Rugby World Cup and also hosted the 2015 Rugby World Cup.[398] The
itop level of club participation is the English Premiership. Leicester Tigers,
iLondon Wasps, Bath Rugby and Northampton Saints have had success in the
iEurope-wide Heineken Cup.
i
iRugby league was born in Huddersfield in 1895. Since 2008, the England
inational rugby league team has been a full test nation in lieu of the Great
iBritain national rugby league team, which won three World Cups but is now
iretired. Club sides play in Super League, the present-day embodiment of the
iRugby Football League Championship. Rugby League is most popular among towns
iin the northern English counties of Lancashire, Yorkshire and Cumbria.[399]
iThe vast majority of English clubs in Super League are based in the north of
iEngland. Some of the most successful clubs include Wigan Warriors, Hull F.C.
iSt. Helens, Leeds Rhinos and Huddersfield Giants; the former three have all
iwon the World Club Challenge previously.
i
iGolf has been prominent in England; due in part to its cultural and
igeographical ties to Scotland, the home of Golf.[400] There are both
iprofessional tours for men and women, in two main tours: the PGA and the
iEuropean Tour. England has produced grand slam winners: Cyril Walker, Tony
iJacklin, Nick Faldo, and Justin Rose in the men's and Laura Davies, Alison
iNicholas, and Karen Stupples in the women's. The world's oldest golf
itournament, and golf's first major is The Open Championship, played both in
iEngland and Scotland. The biennial golf competition, the Ryder Cup, is named
iafter English businessman Samuel Ryder who sponsored the event and donated
ithe
itrophy.[401] Nick Faldo is the most successful Ryder Cup player ever, having
iwon the most points (25) of any player on either the European or US
iteams.[402]
i
iTennis was created in Birmingham in the late 19th century, and the Wimbledon
iChampionships is the oldest tennis tournament in the world, and widely
iconsidered the most prestigious.[404][405] Wimbledon is a tournament that has
ia major place in the British cultural calendar. Fred Perry was the last
iEnglishman to win Wimbledon in 1936. He was the first player to win all four
iGrand Slam singles titles[406] and helped lead the Great Britain team to four
iDavis Cup wins. English women who have won Wimbledon include: Ann Haydon
iJones
iin 1969 and Virginia Wade in 1977.
i
iIn boxing, under the Marquess of Queensberry Rules, England has produced many
iworld champions across the weight divisions internationally recognised by the
igoverning bodies. World champions include Bob Fitzsimmons, Ted "Kid" Lewis,
iRandolph Turpin, Nigel Benn, Chris Eubank, Frank Bruno, Lennox Lewis, Ricky
iHatton, Naseem Hamed, Amir Khan, Carl Froch, and David Haye.[407] In women's
iboxing, Nicola Adams became the world's first woman to win an Olympic boxing
igold medal at the 2012 Summer Olympics.
i
iOriginating in 17th and 18th-century England, the thoroughbred is a horse
ibreed best known for its use in horse racing. The National Hunt horse race
ithe
iGrand National, is held annually at Aintree Racecourse in early April. It is
ithe most watched horse race in the UK, attracting casual observers, and
ithree-time winner Red Rum is the most successful racehorse in the event's
ihistory.[408] Red Rum is also the best-known racehorse in the country.[409]
i
iThe 1950 British Grand Prix at Silverstone was the first race in the newly
icreated Formula One World Championship.[410] Since then, England has produced
isome of the greatest drivers in the sport, including; John Surtees, Stirling
iMoss, Graham Hill (only driver to have won the Triple Crown), Nigel Mansell
i(only man to hold F1 and IndyCar titles at the same time), Damon Hill, Lewis
iHamilton and Jenson Button.[411] It has manufactured some of the most
itechnically advanced racing cars, and many of today's racing companies choose
iEngland as their base of operations for its engineering knowledge and
iorganisation. McLaren Automotive, Williams F1, Team Lotus, Honda, Brawn GP,
iBenetton, Renault, and Red Bull Racing are all, or have been, located in the
isouth of England. England also has a rich heritage in Grand Prix motorcycle
iracing, the premier championship of motorcycle road racing, and produced
iseveral World Champions across all the various class of motorcycle: Mike
iHailwood, John Surtees, Phil Read, Geoff Duke, and Barry Sheene.
i
iDarts is a widely popular sport in England; a professional competitive sport,
idarts is a traditional pub game. The sport is governed by the World Darts
iFederation, one of its member organisations is the British Darts Organisation
i(BDO), which annually stages the BDO World Darts Championship, the other
ibeing
ithe Professional Darts Corporation (PDC), which runs its own world
ichampionship at Alexandra Palace in London. Phil Taylor is widely regarded as
ithe best darts player of all time, having won 187 professional tournaments,
iand a record 16 World Championships.[412][413] Trina Gulliver is the ten-time
iWomen's World Professional Darts Champion of the British Darts Organisation.
iAnother popular sport commonly associated with pub games is Snooker, and
iEngland has produced several world champions, including Steve Davis and
iRonnie
iO'Sullivan.
i
iThe English are keen sailors and enjoy competitive sailing; founding and
iwinning some of the world's most famous and respected international
icompetitive tournaments across the various race formats, including the match
irace, a regatta, and the America's Cup. England has produced some of the
iworld's greatest sailors, including Francis Chichester, Herbert Hasler, John
iRidgway, Robin Knox-Johnston, Ellen MacArthur, Mike Golding, Paul Goodison,
iand the most successful Olympic sailor ever Ben Ainslie.[414]
i
i===== National symbols =====
i
iThe St George's Cross has been the national flag of England since the 13th
icentury. Originally the flag was used by the maritime Republic of Genoa. The
iEnglish monarch paid a tribute to the Doge of Genoa from 1190 onwards so that
iEnglish ships could fly the flag as a means of protection when entering the
iMediterranean. A red cross was a symbol for many Crusaders in the 12th and
i13th centuries. It became associated with Saint George, along with countries
iand cities, which claimed him as their patron saint and used his cross as a
ibanner.[415] Since 1606 the St George's Cross has formed part of the design
iof
ithe Union Flag, a Pan-British flag designed by King James I.[259] During the
iEnglish Civil War and Interregnum, the New Model Army's standards and the
iCommonwealth's Great Seal both incorporated the flag of Saint
iGeorge.[416][417]
i
iThere are numerous other symbols and symbolic artefacts, both official and
iunofficial, including the Tudor rose, the nation's floral emblem, and the
iThree Lions featured on the Royal Arms of England. The Tudor rose was adopted
ias a national emblem of England around the time of the Wars of the Roses as a
isymbol of peace.[418] It is a syncretic symbol in that it merged the white
irose of the Yorkists and the red rose of the Lancastrians—cadet branches of
ithe Plantagenets who went to war over control of the nation. It is also known
ias the Rose of England.[419] The oak tree is a symbol of England,
irepresenting
istrength and endurance. The Royal Oak symbol and Oak Apple Day commemorate
ithe
iescape of King Charles II from the grasp of the parliamentarians after his
ifather's execution: he hid in an oak tree to avoid detection before safely
ireaching exile.
i
iThe Royal Arms of England, a national coat of arms featuring three lions,
ioriginated with its adoption by Richard the Lionheart in 1198. It is blazoned
ias gules, three lions passant guardant or and it provides one of the most
iprominent symbols of England; it is similar to the traditional arms of
iNormandy. England does not have an official designated national anthem, as
ithe
iUnited Kingdom as a whole has God Save the King. However, the following are
ioften considered unofficial English national anthems: Jerusalem, Land of Hope
iand Glory (used for England during the 2002 Commonwealth Games),[420] and I
iVow to Thee, My Country. England's National Day is 23 April which is Saint
iGeorge's Day: Saint George is the patron saint of England.[421]
i
i===== See also =====
i
i===== Notes =====
i
i===== References =====
i
i===== External links =====
i
i
i
i  ------------- SOURCE ----------------
i
iURL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/England
i
iLICENSE: Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike
i
i=========================================
i
i
i$
Bt:England - Wikipedia	/x/w/g/https_58__47__47_en_46_wikipedia_46_org_47_wiki_47_England	texopher.com	70
