i
1[?] Read Details	/x/w/gd/https_58__47__47_en_46_wikipedia_46_org_47_wiki_47_Dominic_95_Thiem	texopher.com	70
i
i===== Contents =====
i
iDominic Thiem (German pronunciation: [ˈdɔmɪnɪk ˈtiːm];[6] born 3 September
i1993) is an Austrian professional tennis player. He has been ranked as high
ias
iworld No. 3 in singles by the Association of Tennis Professionals, which he
ifirst achieved in March 2020. Thiem has won 17 ATP Tour singles titles,
iincluding a Grand Slam title at the 2020 US Open where he came back from two
isets down to defeat Alexander Zverev in the final. With the win, Thiem became
ithe first male player born in the 1990s to claim a major singles title, as
iwell as the first Austrian to win the US Open singles title. He had
ipreviously
ireached three other major finals, finishing runner-up at the 2018 and 2019
iFrench Opens to Rafael Nadal, and at the 2020 Australian Open to Novak
iDjokovic. Thiem was also runner-up at the 2019 and 2020 ATP Finals, where he
ilost to Stefanos Tsitsipas and Daniil Medvedev, respectively.
i
iAs a junior, Thiem was ranked as high as world No. 2. He was runner-up at the
i2011 French Open boys tournament, and won the 2011 Orange Bowl. As a
iprofessional, he broke into the top 100 for the first time in 2014. In 2015,
ihe won his first ATP title at the 2015 Open de Nice Côte d'Azur in France.
iThe
inext year he reached his first major semifinal at the 2016 French Open. In
idoing so, he first entered the top ten of the world rankings. He went on to
ireach his first Masters 1000 final in 2017 at the Madrid Open, before
ireaching
ihis first major final the following year. Thiem won his maiden Masters 1000
ititle at the 2019 Indian Wells Masters, beating Roger Federer in the final.
i
iThiem has some of the heaviest groundstrokes of the tour, consistently
ihitting big with both his forehand and single-handed backhand. Generally
ithought of as a baseliner, he has added more variety with the use of a sliced
ibackhand and more netplay since adding coach Nicolás Massú to his team in
iMarch 2019. At 1.85 m (6 ft 1 in), he possesses a serve reaching up to 145
imiles per hour (233 km/h), which he often uses to set up effective one-two
ipunches. Thiem won the 2020 Austrian Sportsman of the Year award, the fourth
itime a tennis player has won the award since its creation in 1949.
i
i===== Early life and background =====
i
iThiem was born in Wiener Neustadt, Austria on 3 September 1993 to Wolfgang
iand Karin Thiem, both of whom are tennis coaches.[7] He has a younger
ibrother,
iMoritz Thiem, who is also a professional tennis player. Thiem grew up in
iLichtenwörth and began playing tennis when he was six years old.[7]
i
iThiem's father, Wolfgang, began working as a coach at Günter Bresnik's
iacademy in Vienna in 1997, when Thiem was just three years old. Bresnik
ibecame
iThiem's coach formally from age nine.[8] It was Bresnik who advised the
ichange
iof Thiem's two-handed backhand to a one-handed backhand when he was 12 years
iold. Bresnik has said that Thiem's junior results took a dip for about a year
iwhile the stroke developed.[9] Thiem struggled with health issues when he was
i17 years old, which he attributed to a large growth spurt of 16 centimetres
i(6
iin) he had that year.[10]
i
i===== Junior career =====
i
iThiem entered his first event on the International Tennis Federation (ITF)
ijunior circuit in early 2008 when he was 14.[11] Thiem reached an ITF Junior
iCircuit ranking of world No. 2 (combined singles and doubles) on 3 January
i2011.[12] He did not play many events in 2008, returning with a fuller
ischedule in 2009.[11] He won his first junior title at the Preveza Cup, a
iGrade 5 tournament held on hard court in Greece. Thiem followed this with
ianother title in 2009 at the Grawe Junior Cup, a slightly higher level Grade
i4
itournament, on clay in Croatia.[13]
i
iIn 2010 Thiem won his first Grade 1 tournament on clay at the Country Club
iBarranquilla Open, in Columbia, without dropping a set. He followed this with
ia title in Peru at the Grade 2 Inka Bowl and another Grade 1 title at the
i32nd
iTorneo Internazionale "Citta' Di Santa Croce" Mauro Sabatini in Italy.[13] He
iwas seeded eighth at the 2010 French Open Junior Championships but lost in
ithe
ifirst round to Ashley Hewitt. He also lost in the first round of the US Open
iJunior Championships before winning the XXIV Yucatan World Cup 2010 and the
iEddie Herr International Junior Tennis Championships back to back.[11]
i
iThiem reached the second round at the Australian Open Junior Championships in
iearly 2011.[11] In May he reached the final of the 2011 French Open boys'
ievent losing a close final to Bjorn Fratangelo, in three sets.[14] He won the
inext tournament he played, the 12th Gerry Weber Junior Open, a Grade 2
itournament held on grass.[13] He lost in the third round of the Junior
iChampionships, Wimbledon, and in the first round at the 2011 US Open Junior
iChampionships.[11] Thiem completed his junior career by winning his last
ithree
isingles tournaments, the XXV Yucatan Cup, the Eddie Herr International Junior
iTennis Championships and culminating in taking the title at the Orange Bowl
iInternational Tennis Championship in Plantation, Florida, United
iStates.[15][16]
i
iThiem finished his junior career with a 115–33 win–loss record in singles and
i49–32 win–loss record in doubles. He recorded victories over many future
istars
isuch as Lucas Pouille and Kyle Edmund.[12]
i
i===== Career =====
i
iThiem turned pro in 2011, mainly competing in ITF Futures events and making
ihis ATP main draw debut after he received wild cards to the main draw of
iKitzbühel, Bangkok and Vienna. In Vienna, Thiem recorded his first ATP win
iover compatriot Thomas Muster, a former world No. 1 who had come back from
iretirement in 2010 after an 11 year break, before losing to Steve Darcis in
ithe second round.[17][18] In 2012, Thiem continued to compete mainly at
iFutures level, going 34–15 in matches with three titles. He received a wild
icard to Vienna for a second time, defeating Lukáš Lacko, before losing to
iMarinko Matosevic in the second round.[7]
i
iIn 2013 Thiem competed in Futures and ATP Challengers, while also receiving
iwild cards at ATP Tour level to his home events in Kitzbühel and Vienna. In
iKitzbühel he made it through to the quarterfinals by defeating the fourth
iseed
iJürgen Melzer in the second round. He lost in the quarterfinals to Albert
iMontañés in straight sets. At the Vienna Open, Thiem reached his second
iquarterfinal of the year losing to the top seed, Jo-Wilfried Tsonga, in a
iclose three-set match.[15]
i
iThiem entered the top 100 for the first time in 2014, and was the youngest
iplayer to end the year in the top 50, ranked 39, having started the year
iranked 137. He spent the first half of the year entering qualifying for ATP
iTour events, and was successful seven out of eight times.[19] Thiem began the
iyear at the Qatar Open by qualifying for the main draw, but lost to Peter
iGojowczyk in the first round.[20] At the Australian Open, Thiem qualified for
ia place in the main draw. He defeated João Sousa in four sets for his first
imain-draw victory at a Grand Slam tournament. He then lost to 19th seed Kevin
iAnderson in the second round.[21] In February Thiem qualified for the
iRotterdam Open, and in the second round of the main draw, he pushed Andy
iMurray to three sets, losing out in the third.[19] At Indian Wells Thiem
iqualified for the main draw and defeated American Daniel Kosakowski in the
ifirst round at his first Masters 1000. He recorded his highest ranked win to
idate in the second round against the 21st seed, Gilles Simon, in straight
isets.[19] He lost in the next round to Julien Benneteau.[22] The next week he
isucceeded in qualifying for the main draw at the Miami Open but lost to Tommy
iRobredo in the second round in a tight two setter.[23] Thiem received a wild
icard for the main draw of the Monte-Carlo Masters.[19] But he was defeated in
ithe first round by Nicolas Mahut in three sets.[24] The next week he went
ithrough qualifying for the main draw at the Barcelona Open. He beat Radek
iŠtěpánek and Marcel Granollers, before losing to Santiago Giraldo in the
ithird
iround.[25][26]
i
iAt the Madrid Open, Thiem qualified for a main tour event for the seventh
itime in 2014. In the second round he had the biggest win of his career when
ihe
idefeated the world No. 3, Stan Wawrinka, in three sets.[19][27] Thiem started
ihis campaign at the French Open by beating Frenchman Paul-Henri Mathieu in
istraight sets. In the second round he faced world No. 1 and the defending
ichampion, Rafael Nadal, but was defeated in straight sets, only winning seven
igames in the process.[28] Thiem suffered consecutive first-round losses on
igrass at the Queen's Club Championships in London, to David Goffin,[29] and
iat
ithe Wimbledon Championships to Australian qualifier Luke Saville.[30]
i
iAfter Wimbledon, Thiem played at the International German Open where he
ireached the third round before being defeated by Leonardo Mayer.[31][32]
iThiem
iwas seeded at an ATP tournament for the first time in his career at the Swiss
iOpen Gstaad. Seeded eighth, he lost in the first round to wild card Viktor
iTroicki.[33] At the Austrian Open Kitzbühel Thiem was seeded fifth. In the
isemifinal he beat Juan Mónaco to reach his first ATP Tour 250 final at the
iage
iof 20. In the final, he fell to David Goffin despite being a set up.[34]
iCompeting in his first ever US Open in 2014, Thiem reached the fourth round
idefeating 11th seed Ernests Gulbis, and 19th seed Feliciano López, before
ilosing to sixth seed Tomáš Berdych.[35] At the end of the 2014 season Thiem
icompleted four weeks of mandatory national service with the Austrian
imilitary.[36][37]
i
iThiem had a slow start to the year, going 3–6 in matches before he reached
ihis first Masters 1000 quarterfinals at the Miami Open.[7] Thiem was defeated
iin the first round of the Australian Open to Roberto Bautista Agut.[38] At
iRotterdam he beat Ernests Gulbis but fell to Sergiy Stakhovsky in the second
iround.[39] At the Open 13 in Marseille, he defeated João Sousa and David
iGoffin to reach the quarterfinals, where he was beaten by Bautista Agut.[40]
iThe Austrian reached the quarterfinals at the Miami Open losing to Andy
iMurray
iin three sets.[41] At the Rome Masters he won over Gilles Simon to reach the
ithird round, where he was defeated by Stan Wawrinka.[42] Thiem won his first
icareer ATP Tour title in Nice, France,[43] defeating Nick Kyrgios, Ernests
iGulbis and John Isner en route, winning a close three-setter against
iArgentina's Leonardo Mayer in the final.[44] At the French Open, Thiem
idefeated Aljaž Bedene to progress to the second round, where he was defeated
iby 21st seed Pablo Cuevas in four close sets.[45]
i
iThiem entered the Nottingham Open as the seventh seed, he defeated Malek
iJaziri to claim his first win on grass in 2015, but was knocked out in the
ithird round by Alexandr Dolgopolov.[46] Thiem competed at the third Grand
iSlam
iof the year, the Wimbledon Championships as the 32nd seed, marking the first
itime he had been seeded at a Grand Slam tournament. He defeated Israel's Dudi
iSela in four sets, marking his first ever win at Wimbledon. In the second
iround, Thiem lost a close five-setter against Fernando Verdasco, despite
ibeing
i2–1 up in sets.[47] After Wimbledon, he participated at the Croatia Open Umag
ias the fourth seed, which gave him a bye into the second round. After wins
iover Dušan Lajović and compatriot Andreas Haider-Maurer (after both players
iretired), Thiem advanced to the semifinals, where he defeated Gaël Monfils
iand
iearned himself a place in his third career final.[48] In the final, he
idefeated Portugal's João Sousa in straight sets to claim his second career
iATP
iTour title.[49] A week later Thiem won his third title at the Swiss Open
iGstaad, beating David Goffin in the final, winning back to back tournaments
ifor the first time.[50]
i
iThiem next played at his home tournament, the Generali Open Kitzbühel, as the
ifirst seed which marked the first time he entered an ATP tournament as the
itop
iseeded player. After receiving a bye, he managed to avoid an early exit, as
ihe
igained a close three set win against Andreas Haider-Maurer.[51] He defeated
iAlbert Montañés in the quarterfinals, after Montañés retired five games into
ithe second set. In the semifinals he was denied a place in his third
iconsecutive final when he lost to German Philipp Kohlschreiber, which ended
ihis winning streak of ten matches.[52] After the tournament ended, Thiem
ientered the top 20 for the first time, reaching a new career high of world
iNo.
i18.[53]
i
iThiem won four titles in 2016, including a first at the ATP 500 level at
iAcapulco, and reached the French Open semifinals, the first time he had
iprogressed past the fourth round at the Grand Slam level. Thiem started the
iyear with a semifinal run in Brisbane on outdoor hard courts, beating world
iNo. 13 Marin Čilić, but losing to Roger Federer in straight sets. Thiem
ireached the third round of the Australian Open, losing to world No. 16, David
iGoffin, in four sets. Thiem next competed at the Argentina Open, where he was
iseeded fifth. In the semifinals he upset world No. 5 and defending champion
iRafael Nadal in three sets. Thiem went on to win his fourth ATP title by
idefeating Nicolás Almagro in three sets.[54]
i
iHis next tournament was the Rio Open. Thiem reached the quarterfinals where
ihe defeated David Ferrer, his second top-ten win in two weeks. He was
idefeated
iby Guido Pella in the semifinals, displaying signs of fatigue during the
imatch.[55] In February, Thiem won the Mexican Open in Acapulco, his first
ihard
icourt title. He defeated Bernard Tomic in the final. With this win, Thiem
iattained a career-high ranking of 14 on 29 February,[56][57] also rising to
iNo. 3 in the Race to London.[58][59] In early March, Thiem participated in
iAustria's Davis Cup Group I first-round tie versus Portugal on indoor hard
icourts. In singles, he defeated Gastão Elias in a fifth set tiebreak.
iPartnering Alexander Peya, he also beat Elias and João Sousa in doubles.[60]
iIn reverse singles, Thiem defeated Sousa to give Austria a 3–1 lead, and the
iteam went on to win the tie by 4 rubbers to 1.[61]
i
iThiem competed at Indian Wells where he reached the fourth round before
ifalling to world No. 9, Jo-Wilfried Tsonga. In March, at the Miami Open he
ireached the fourth round succumbing to world No. 1 Novak Djokovic.[62] Thiem
ithen played at the Monte-Carlo Masters losing to Rafael Nadal in the third
iround. In late April, Thiem reached the ATP 250 final in Munich on outdoor
iclay, he played Philipp Kohlschreiber ultimately losing in three sets.[63]
iThiem lost in the first round of the Madrid Open before he competed in the
iItalian Open. He defeated Roger Federer, who was suffering from a back
iinjury,
iin straight sets. In the quarterfinals, Thiem lost to sixth seed Kei
iNishikori. In Nice, Thiem successfully defended his title, beating Alexander
iZverev in the final. At the French Open, Thiem reached the semifinals of a
imajor for the first time by defeating David Goffin in the quarterfinals. He
ilost to No. 1 and eventual champion Novak Djokovic in the semifinals. By
ireaching this semifinal he also made his debut inside the top ten of ATP
irankings as world No. 7.[64]
i
iIn early June, Thiem competed at the Stuttgart Open as the third seed. He
idefeated first seed Roger Federer in the semifinal. In the final, he defeated
iPhilipp Kohlschreiber over two days to win his first grass court tournament.
iWith the win he became the 29th player in Open Era history (since May 1968)
ito
iwin ATP titles on three different surfaces in the same year.[65] Thiem next
icompeted at the Halle Open where he lost to Florian Mayer in the
isemifinal.[66] At Wimbledon, in the first round Thiem again encountered
iFlorian Mayer, but this time he won. In the second round, Thiem was defeated
iby Jiří Veselý.[67] At the US Open, Thiem beat Pablo Carreño Busta to reach
ithe fourth round, where he retired against Juan Martín del Potro due to right
iknee injury.[68] After the US Open, Thiem reached the final at the Moselle
iOpen but lost to Lucas Pouille.[69] Thiem qualified for the ATP Finals for
ithe
ifirst time losing his opening match to Novak Djokovic before he scored a win
iagainst Gaël Monfils.[70] He was eliminated in the round robin stage
ifollowing
ia loss to Milos Raonic. He ended the year ranked No. 8, his first time
ifinishing inside the top ten.[53]
i
iThiem improved his Grand Slam results in 2017, reaching the fourth round in
iall four, and a second consecutive semifinal at the French Open. Thiem began
ithe year by playing at the Brisbane International, losing in the
iquarterfinals
iagainst eventual winner Grigor Dimitrov.[71] Thiem then played at the Sydney
iInternational as the top seed. Thiem overcame Gastao Elias but lost in the
iquarterfinals to Dan Evans.[72] At the Australian Open, Thiem advanced to the
ifourth round for the first time, but lost to Goffin for the second year in a
irow.[73] Thiem went to the Rotterdam Open for the first ATP 500 event of the
iyear. After defeating Alexander Zverev and Gilles Simon, Thiem lost in the
iquarterfinals to Pierre-Hugues Herbert.[74] The following week, Thiem was
iagain the second seed at an ATP 500 event, this time at the Rio Open. Thiem
iclaimed his first title since June, defeating Pablo Carreño Busta in the
ifinal. This was Thiem's eighth ATP Tour title, his sixth on clay, and his
isecond at the 500 level.[75] Thiem played in his third consecutive ATP 500
ievent at the Mexican Open in Acapulco, where he was the defending champion.
iSeeded fourth, Thiem lost in the quarterfinals to Sam Querrey, who eventually
iwon the tournament.[76]
i
iAt the quarterfinals of the Indian Wells Masters he met Stan Wawrinka, losing
ia final set tiebreak.[77] After losing his opening round match in Miami to
iBorna Ćorić, and a second round exit in Monte Carlo to David Goffin,[74] he
imade his 12th ATP Tour final in Barcelona losing to Rafael Nadal in two
isets.[78] En route he scored his first win over a current world No. 1,
ibeating
iAndy Murray in the semifinals.[79] At the Madrid Open, Thiem reached his
ifirst
iMasters 1000 final against Rafael Nadal.[80] Thiem lost but showed an
iimprovement over his Barcelona Open scores against Nadal.[81] Thiem defeated
iNadal in the quarterfinals of the Rome Masters 1000 tournament in two
istraight
isets, before falling to Novak Djokovic in the semifinals.[82] At the French
iOpen, Thiem did not drop a set in his first five matches including defeating
idefending champion Novak Djokovic[83] before losing in the semifinal to
ieventual champion Rafael Nadal in straight sets.[84]
i
iAt the beginning of the grass court season, Thiem reached the second round of
ithe Halle Open, losing to Robin Haase.[85] Then, in the second round of the
iAntalya Open, he was upset by qualifier Ramkumar Ramanathan, then ranked 222
iin the world.[86] At Wimbledon, he reached the fourth round for the first
itime
iin his career, losing out to eventual semifinalist Tomáš Berdych in five
isets.[87] Thiem then participated in the Washington Open, where he lost to
iKevin Anderson in the third round.[88] At the Canadian Open in Montreal, he
ireceived a bye into the second round, but lost to Diego Schwartzman.[89] He
ithen reached the quarterfinals of Cincinnati, where he lost to David
iFerrer.[90] At the US Open, Thiem made it to the fourth round against 2009 US
iOpen champion Juan Martín del Potro, he eventually lost in five sets, after
ifailing to capitalize on two match points in the fourth set.[91] Thiem again
istruggled with form following the US Open, losing three straight matches in
iChengdu, Tokyo and Shanghai.[92][93][94] Nonetheless, he qualified for the
iATP
iFinals for the second straight year. Thiem then lost his second match in both
iVienna and Paris to Richard Gasquet and Fernando Verdasco successively.[95]
iThiem broke into the top five in the rankings for the first time in his
icareer, rising to world No. 4. During the round robin stage of the ATP
iFinals,
iThiem defeated Pablo Carreño Busta in three sets, but lost to David Goffin
iand
iGrigor Dimitrov. He did not advance to the semifinals.[96]
i
iThiem reached a first Grand Slam final at the French Open, and a first US
iOpen quarterfinal in 2018, along with a second Masters 1000 final in Madrid.
iIn late December 2017, coach Galo Blanco was added to Thiem's team and they
iworked together until the end of the tennis season.[97][98] Thiem began his
iseason at the Qatar Open as the top seed. He reached the semifinals where he
iwithdrew from his match against Gaël Monfils due to illness.[99] At the
iAustralian Open, Thiem lost in the fourth round against Tennys Sandgren. This
iwas equal to his result of the previous year at the Australian Open.[100]
iThiem's next tournament in mid-February saw him win his ninth ATP Tour title
iat the Argentina Open, his second in Buenos Aires. This was his first title
iin
inearly a year.[101] In Indian Wells, he won his second round match against
iStefanos Tsitsipas.[102] In his third-round match against Pablo Cuevas, he
irolled his ankle in winning in the first set, later retiring from the match.
iHe skipped Miami because of the hairline fracture ankle injury.[103]
i
iThiem next played in Monte Carlo, losing to Rafael Nadal in the
iquarterfinals.[104] In Barcelona, he again advanced to the quarterfinals,
ibefore falling to Stefanos Tsitsipas.[105] In Madrid, he faced Nadal in the
iquarterfinals. This time, he came through to win, ending Nadal's 21-match and
irecord 50-set winning streak on clay.[106] Thiem had been the last man to win
iagainst Nadal on clay the previous year in Rome. Thiem then defeated Kevin
iAnderson to reach the final where he lost to Alexander Zverev in straight
isets.[107] Thiem was the sixth seed at Rome, but lost his first match to
iFabio
iFognini in three sets.[108] Thiem then played in Lyon, where he came back
ifrom
ia set and a break down against Gilles Simon to win his 10th ATP title.[109]
iAt
ithe French Open, Thiem faced Alexander Zverev in the quarterfinals, defeating
ihim in straight sets.[110] In his third consecutive French Open semifinal,
iThiem defeated unseeded Marco Cecchinato to advance to his first Grand Slam
ifinal.[111] He then lost in straight sets in the final to Rafael Nadal.[112]
i
iThiem lost to Stefanos Tsitsipas in his first match at the Canadian
iOpen,[113] and was forced to withdraw from Cincinnati due to illness.[114] At
ithe US Open, he reached the fourth round for the third consecutive year.
iThere, he faced 2017 finalist Kevin Anderson, defeating him in straight sets
ito reach his first Grand Slam quarterfinal on hard court, where he faced top
iseed Nadal.[115] This was their first meeting on a surface other than clay.
iIn
ia surprising one-sided start to the match, Thiem won the first set, yielding
ionly seven points. Nadal took control and won the second and third sets.
iThiem
ithen won the fourth set in a tiebreak. Nadal won the fifth set tiebreak to
ibring the match to an end at 2:04 AM local time, after 4 hours and 49 minutes
iof play.[116][117] Later that month, Thiem claimed a title at the St
iPetersburg Open. He defeated Martin Kližan to secure his ninth ATP 250
ititle.[118] At the Shanghai Masters, Thiem was upset by unseeded Matthew
iEbden
iin his first match.[119] Thiem was the top seed at the Vienna Open, advancing
ito the quarterfinals where he lost to Kei Nishikori.[120] Then at the Paris
iMasters, Thiem was seeded sixth, reaching the semifinals before losing to
ieventual champion Karen Khachanov.[121] At the ATP Finals, Thiem was
ieliminated in the group stage after winning one match, against Kei
iNishikori,[122] and losing his two others, against Kevin Anderson and Roger
iFederer.[123][124] He ended the 2018 season ranked world No. 8.[53]
i
iThiem won five titles in 2019, tying with Novak Djokovic for the Tour
ilead.[7] Thiem started his season at the Qatar Open, but was upset in the
ifirst round by Pierre-Hugues Herbert.[125] At the Australian Open, he
idefeated
iBenoît Paire in five sets before retiring to Alexei Popyrin in the second
iround.[126][127] He failed to defend his title in Buenos Aires and was
iknocked
iout of the Rio Open by Laslo Djere.[128] At the Indian Wells Masters, he
idefeated Ivo Karlovic, got a walkover through Gael Monfils, and beat Milos
iRaonic en route to the final, where he defeated Roger Federer in three sets
ito
iclaim his first ATP Masters 1000 title.[129] As a result, he returned to his
icareer-best ranking of world No. 4.[130] Nicolás Massú was a new addition to
iThiem's coaching team a month before the Indian Wells tournament.[131]
i
iAt the Monte Carlo Masters he lost to eventual finalist Dušan Lajović in the
ithird round.[132] Thiem next went to Barcelona, where he captured his third
icareer ATP 500 title. En route to the title, Thiem did not drop a set,
iincluding in his win over eleven-time champion Rafael Nadal in the semifinal,
ihis fourth win on clay over the Spaniard.[133] Thiem defeated Daniil Medvedev
iin straight sets in the final.[134] Just prior to the French Open Thiem
iparted
iwith long time coach and manager Günter Bresnik, who he had been working with
ifor 15 years.[135] Thiem was seeded fourth at the French Open and reached his
ifourth consecutive semifinal at the tournament where he faced world No. 1,
iNovak Djokovic. In a four-hour match stretching over two days, Thiem defeated
iDjokovic in five sets, advancing to his second major final.[136] In the
ifinal,
ihe again faced Rafael Nadal. After splitting the competitive first two sets,
iNadal won the third and fourth sets to take the match.[137]
i
iAt Wimbledon, Thiem lost in the first round to Sam Querrey.[138] Thiem played
iin Hamburg, losing in the quarterfinals to Andrey Rublev.[139] The following
iweek he won the 14th title of his career in Kitzbühel defeating Albert Ramos
iViñolas in the final.[140] At the US Open he lost to Thomas Fabbiano in the
ifirst round in four sets, his second first-round Grand Slam loss in a
irow.[141] At the China Open, Thiem defeated Andy Murray in straight sets to
iprogress to the semifinals,[142] where he defeated Karen Khachanov after
ibeing
idown a set and a break and coming back to win in three sets. With this win he
iqualified for the ATP Finals.[143] In the final Thiem defeated Stefanos
iTsitsipas to win his first title in Asia, fourth title in 2019 and 15th
icareer
ititle.[144] At the Shanghai Masters Thiem reached the quarterfinals before
ibeing bested by Matteo Berrettini.[145] For the first time in ten attempts,
iThiem made past the quarterfinal stage at his home tournament in Vienna.[146]
iHe reached the final where he triumphed over Diego Schwartzman to claim the
iVienna Open trophy, for his 16th career title.[147]
i
iAt the ATP Finals, Thiem defeated Roger Federer and Novak Djokovic in
iconsecutive matches, and became the first player to qualify for the
isemifinals. It was Thiem's first win over Djokovic on hard court.[148] Thiem
ithen defeated Alexander Zverev in straight sets to reach the final where he
ilost to Stefanos Tsitsipas in three sets.[149]
i
iIn a curtailed season due to the COVID-19 pandemic Thiem posted his best
iresults at Grand Slam tournaments. He began his 2020 season at the inaugural
iATP Cup, where Austria was defeated in the group stage. He played three
imatches, defeating Diego Schwartzman but losing to Borna Ćorić and Hubert
iHurkacz.[150][151] Seeded fifth at the Australian Open, Thiem reached his
ifirst quarterfinals there where he faced top seed and 2009 champion Rafael
iNadal in just their second match on hard court. He defeated Nadal in four
isets, winning three tiebreaks, proceeding to the semifinals.[152] He then
idefeated seventh seed Alexander Zverev in four sets to make his first Grand
iSlam final on hard courts.[153] In the final, Thiem lost to defending
ichampion
iNovak Djokovic in five sets.[154]
i
iOn 2 March Thiem rose to a new career high ranking of world No. 3, passing
iRoger Federer in the ATP rankings.[155] Thiem arrived early at Indian Wells
ito
idefend his 2019 title.[156][157] However, due to the COVID-19 pandemic the
i2020 Indian Wells Masters was postponed.[158] Shortly afterward the ATP Tour
iwas suspended until July.[159] During the ATP Tour's suspension Thiem
icompeted
iin several exhibition events.[160] He won the first leg of the Adria Tour
iexhibition event in Belgrade,[161] the Bett1 Aces event in Berlin,[162] the
iAustrian Pro Series event and reached the final of his own exhibition event,
iThiem's 7.[163] On the tour's resumption in August, at the Cincinnati Masters
iin New York, Thiem lost his opening match to Filip Krajinović.[164]
i
iThiem was the second seed in the men's singles draw at the 2020 US Open. In
ithe third round, he defeated 2014 champion Marin Čilić in four sets.[165] He
iwent on to beat Félix Auger-Aliassime in the round of 16 in straight sets. He
ibeat Alex de Minaur in the quarterfinals in straight sets, following which he
idefeated third seed Daniil Medvedev in three sets in the semifinals to reach
ihis first US Open final.[166] He defeated Alexander Zverev in the final to
iwin
ihis first major title, the first time since the 2004 French Open that a
iplayer
ihad come back from losing the first two sets in a Grand Slam final to win the
ititle. This was the fifth time a player has come back from two sets down in
ithe Open era.[167] Thiem became the first male tennis player born in the
i1990s
ito win a major title.[168] Thiem additionally became the first new Grand Slam
ichampion in the men's singles since Marin Čilić won the 2014 US Open.[169]
i
iThiem was seeded third at the French Open. He reached the quarterfinals where
ihe was defeated by Diego Schwartzman in a five-set match which took five
ihours
iand eight minutes to complete.[170] Thiem then played as the defending
ichampion at the Vienna Open but lost in the quarterfinals to Andrey Rublev in
istraight sets.[171]
i
iAt the ATP Finals, Thiem was drawn with Stefanos Tsitsipas, Rafael Nadal, and
iAndrey Rublev. He beat Tsitsipas in a rematch of the previous year's final.
iHe
ithen defeated Nadal in two tiebreaks guaranteeing him passage to the
isemifinals. He beat Novak Djokovic in the semifinals, recording his 300th
imatch win and his fifth against a World No. 1,[172] but lost the finals to
iDaniil Medvedev in three sets.[173] After a breakthrough year and winning his
ifirst Grand Slam, Thiem was awarded the Austrian Sportsman of the Year award
iwhich was presented at the Lottery Sports Aid Gala.[174] Sports Illustrated
i(SI) declared Dominic Thiem as Winner of Tennis MVP award for the year
i2020.[175]
i
iThiem began the 2021 season at the ATP Cup, Austria were defeated in the
igroup stage. Thiem lost his opener to Matteo Berrettini, and was a set up
iwhen
iBenoit Paire had to retire due to injury in his second match.[176][177] At
ithe
iAustralian Open Thiem reached the fourth round by defeating Nick Kyrgios,
icoming back from two sets down to win in five sets.[178] In the fourth round
ihe was defeated by Grigor Dimitrov in straight sets.[179] Thiem's next
itournament was Doha, where he beat Aslan Karatsev in 3 sets before losing to
iRoberto Bautista Agut.[180][181] He then lost in the first round of Dubai to
iLloyd Harris.[182]
i
iFollowing these losses Thiem took a break to "recharge"[183] and recover from
ia knee injury.[184] His first tournament back was the Madrid Open, where he
ireached the semifinals by defeating Marcos Giron, Alex de Minaur and John
iIsner before losing to Alexander Zverev in straight sets.[185] At the Italian
iOpen, Thiem beat Marton Fucsovics before falling to Lorenzo Sonego in the
ithird round.[186] In Lyon, Thiem lost his opening match to Cameron
iNorrie.[187][188] At the French Open, Thiem lost in the first round to Pablo
iAndújar in five sets, despite being 2 sets up.[189]
i
iOn June 17, due to his struggling form, Thiem announced his withdrawal from
ithe Tokyo Olympics.[190] Up (5–2) against Adrian Mannarino in the Mallorca
iChampionships, Thiem suffered a right wrist injury, forcing him to retire,
iwhich also led him to withdraw from the 2021 Wimbledon Championships.[191] On
iAugust 18, Thiem announced he was withdrawing for the remainder of the 2021
iseason due to his wrist injury.[192]
i
iThiem was due to play in the Mubadala World Tennis Championship, but withdrew
ifor recovery purposes.[193] He also withdrew from the Australian Open citing
irecovery reasons. He was then set to make his return to the tour at the
iCórdoba Open in February, but withdrew due to a right finger injury.[194]
iThiem announced that he planned to return to the tour in March.[195] Despite
ithis, he withdrew from both the Indian Wells and Miami Open, citing recovery
ionce again. He announced plans to return for the European clay court
iswing.[196]
i
iAt the Marbella Challenger in March, Thiem returned to professional tennis.
iHowever, in the first round, he lost in straight sets to Argentine Pedro
iCachín in his first match back after 7 months. After this match, Thiem tested
ipositive for COVID-19. As a result, on April 7, his spokesperson confirmed
ithat Thiem had pulled out of the upcoming ATP Masters tournament in Monte
iCarlo and would return home to Austria.[197]
i
iUnable to defend his semifinal points from 2021 at the Mutua Madrid Open
ifollowing a first round loss to Andy Murray, he fell out of the top 150 in
ithe
irankings.[198] At the French Open, Thiem lost in straight sets in the first
iround to Hugo Dellien, and subsequently fell out of the top 300.[199]
i
iThiem recorded his first victory at any level in 14 months by beating Filip
iMisolic at the Salzburg Open, a challenger in Austria.[200] He recorded his
ifirst ATP win a week later at the Swedish Open defeating Emil Ruusuvuori in
ithe first round.[201] He then defeated Roberto Bautista Agut, before losing
ito
iSebastián Báez in the quarterfinals.[202] The following week, Thiem made his
ifirst ATP Tour level semifinal at the Swiss Open Gstaad since the 2021 Madrid
iOpen by beating 7th seed Hugo Gaston, Federico Delbonis and Juan Pablo
iVarillas before losing to second seed Matteo Berrettini in the
isemifinals.[203][204] At his home tournament in Kitzbühel Thiem reached the
iquarterfinals for the third week in a row defeating Alexander Shevchenko and
iSebastian Ofner before losing to Yannick Hanfmann.[205][206]
i
iAfter withdrawing from the Western & Southern Open due to illness, Thiem
iplayed at the Winston-Salem Open reaching the third round defeating J. J.
iWolf
iand Grigor Dimitrov before losing to Jack Draper.[207][208] At the US Open as
ia wildcard, he lost in the first round to Pablo Carreño Busta of Spain in
ifour
isets.[209]Following the US Open, he made the final at the Challenger in
iRennes, France, beating Gilles Simon, Ryan Peniston, Adrian Andreev, and Hugo
iGaston, losing to former top 25 player Ugo Humbert. At the Gijón Open he
ireached the semifinals of an ATP tournament for the second time in the season
i(after Gstaad) defeating fourth seed Francisco Cerundolo.[210] He lost to top
iseed Andrey Rublev in straight sets.[211] As a result he climbed more than 30
ipositions up into the top 150 in the singles rankings to No. 132. He also
ireached the semifinals at the European Open in Antwerp defeating Hubert
iHurkacz.[212] He lost to Sebastian Korda in three tight sets. He improved
iclose to 20 positions in the rankings to No. 113 becoming Austrian No. 1
iagain.[213] At his home tournament, the Erste Bank Open in Vienna he defeated
iTommy Paul in a tight three sets match with two tiebreaks saving two match
ipoints in the process.[214] He lost to top seed Daniil Medvedev in straight
isets. He returned to the top 100 on 31 October 2022, ending his 2022
iseason.[215]
i
iThiem started his season at the Adelaide International in Australia, where he
ilost to top qualifying seed Kwon Soon-woo in the qualifier stage.[216] At the
iAustralian Open, he fell to fifth seed Andrey Rublev in straight sets in the
ifirst round.[217] During the South American clay court swing, he earned his
ifirst win of the season in the Argentina Open over Alex Molcan, but fell to
iJuan Pablo Varillas in the second round.[218][219] At the Rio Open and Chile
iOpen, he suffered successive first round exits.[220][221]
i
iIn the US Sunshine double, he battled Adrian Mannarino at the Indian Wells
iMasters, losing in three sets.[222] At the Miami Open, he fell to Lorenzo
iSonego in straight sets, marking a five match losing streak.[223]
i
iThiem started off the European clay court season at the Estoril Open,
ireaching just a second quarterfinal in six months. He defeated Sebastian
iOfner
iand Ben Shelton before losing to Quentin Halys.[224][225] At the Bavarian
iInternational Tennis Championships, Thiem defeated Constant Lestienne and
iMarc-Andrea Huesler to reach the second quarterfinal of the season, where he
ilost to Taylor Fritz in straight sets.[226] In the Challenger tournament in
iMauthausen, Thiem was the favourite to win the title and reached his third
iquarterfinal of the season. After defeating Dino Prizmic, he fell to the
iyoung
iSerbian Hamad Medjedovic in straight sets in the semifinals. In the next
iChallenger in Bordeaux where he entered as an alternate, he defeated Benoit
iPaire.[227]
i
i===== Rivalries =====
i
iThiem and Rafael Nadal have met 15 times; Thiem trails 6–9 (40%). The
imajority of their meetings have been on clay. They first met in 2014 at
iRoland
iGarros with Nadal coming out the victor. Their next meeting was in 2016, this
itime in Buenos Aires and Thiem prevailed for his first win against
iNadal.[228]
iThiem went on to beat Nadal once a year on clay for the next three years
iuntil
i2019, joining Djokovic as one of two players to have defeated Nadal on clay
ifour times or more.[229] Thiem and Nadal have twice met in the French Open
ifinal in 2018 and 2019, both going Nadal's way, straight sets in 2018 and
ifour
isets the following year. Nadal said “He [was] the most difficult
iopponent,”[230] of the 2019 championship.
i
iThiem leads the hard court head-to-head 2–1. Their first meeting on hard was
ione of their closest encounters, a four hour 49 minute quarterfinal at the
i2018 US Open. Thiem won the first set to love, before Nadal fought back to
iclaim victory in a fifth set tiebreak, despite winning six fewer points
iduring
ithe match.[230] The next meeting at the 2020 Australian Open quarterfinals
iwent the other way, featuring 3 tiebreaks, Thiem defeating Nadal on hard
icourt
ifor the first time.[231] In their first meeting on indoor hard court at the
i2020 ATP Finals Thiem won in two tight sets.[232]
i
iThiem and Novak Djokovic have met 12 times; Thiem trails 5–7 (42%). Djokovic
iwon their first five meetings from 2014 to 2017 before Thiem won his first
imatch against him in the 2017 French Open quarterfinals. They split the next
itwo matches they played, both at clay Masters in Monte Carlo and Madrid in
i2018 and 2019 respectively.[228] They met again at the French Open in 2019,
ithis time in the semifinals. Thiem defeated Djokovic in a five set match over
itwo days lasting four hours 13 minutes in very windy and showery
iconditions.[233] Thiem also won their 2019 ATP Finals round robin match in a
ithird set tiebreak, Djokovic praising him afterwards for his "courageous
itennis".[234] Meeting in the final of the 2020 Australian Open, they had
ianother five set match, this time Djokovic prevailing for his eighth
iAustralian Open title.[235] Coming from 0–4 down in the final set tiebreak,
iThiem won their semifinal meeting at the 2020 ATP Finals.[236]
i
iThiem and Roger Federer have met 7 times; Thiem has won 5–2 (71%), meaning
iThiem has won this rivalry after Federer announced his retirement. The pair
isplit their first four meetings, Federer winning on hard court in Brisbane in
i2016, and at the 2018 ATP Finals, Thiem winning in 2016 on clay in Rome and
ion
igrass in Stuttgart.[237] Going into 2019 they were two wins apiece, they
iplayed three times in 2019 the first in the final of the 2019 Indian Wells
iMasters. Federer took the first set but Thiem came back to win in three sets
ifor his first ATP Masters 1000 title. Next they played on clay at the Madrid
iOpen, with Thiem winning again in three sets after losing the first, Thiem
iwinning after saving two match points in the second set tiebreak.[238] The
ilast match they contested against each other was in 2019, in their first
iround
irobin match at the 2019 ATP Finals; Thiem again prevailed in two sets.[239]
i
iThiem and Alexander Zverev have met 11 times; Thiem leads 8–3 (72.73%). Thiem
iwon their first three meetings, all in 2016 and on clay, including a first
ititle fight in Nice before Zverev retaliated with a win on hard court in
iBeijing later in the year.[240] In 2017, Thiem claimed their only meeting in
iRotterdam. In 2018 they contested two matches, the first a Masters 1000 final
iat the Madrid Open, with Zverev taking his third Masters title in straight
isets. The second was in the French Open quarterfinals, this time Thiem
iwinning
iin straight sets. Thiem took their only encounter in 2019 at the Tour Finals,
isaving all four break point opportunities that Zverev created.[240] In 2020
itheir rivalry took place on the biggest stages as they contested a Grand Slam
isemifinal at the Australian Open, and a final at the US Open. In Zverev's
ifirst semifinal and final appearances Thiem was the more experienced player
iand showed this in Melbourne, winning in four sets. In New York in September
iZverev started the match confidently while Thiem was nervous, "I was so tight
iin the beginning,"[241] he said of the first two sets. However the dynamic
ichanged, Thiem overcame his nerves to win the match in a fifth set
itiebreak.[242] At the 2021 Madrid Open, Zverev defeated Thiem in the
isemifinals in straight sets for the second time in Madrid.[185]
i
i===== Playing style =====
i
iThiem is primarily an aggressive baseline player, who is adept at defending,
ias well. His groundstrokes are solid on both wings, with a heavy forehand and
ia tenacious, powerful single-handed backhand. He is one of the few younger
iATP
iplayers to use a single-handed backhand.[243] According to Thiem, he changed
ito his single-handed backhand at the advice of his coach.[9] His backhand can
ieffectively handle high bouncing balls, which has been a big problem for many
iconventional single-handers. Thiem often uses heavy, penetrating
igroundstrokes
ito construct points and outlast his opponents.[244] He has a long take-back
ion
iboth wings, and the top-spin he produces on his groundstrokes allows him to
iboth attack and defend well. Thiem also possesses a strong serve, capable of
ireaching 145 mph (233 km/h).[245] He often returns serve from as far back as
ipossible, which allows him to take more time and prepare full swings at
ireturns.[246] Thiem has improved his slice backhand, an important shot
iespecially on low bouncing hard courts.[247][248]
i
iHis deliberate, yet aggressive playing style, particularly the long take-back
ion his groundstrokes, ability to sustain long baseline rallies and top-spin
iserves have greatly benefited his clay game. The Roland Garros website
idescribed him as an "heir to the throne."[243] He has beaten many high-ranked
iclay-court players on clay, recording four wins over Rafael Nadal on the
isurface. He defeated Nicolás Almagro and Nadal en route to his Argentina Open
ititle, as well as Stan Wawrinka at the 2014 Madrid Open, Roger Federer at the
i2016 Italian Open and the 2019 Madrid Open, and Novak Djokovic at the French
iOpen both in 2017 and 2019.[136] His mental game has also been praised,
iespecially his tiebreak win percentage.[54][249]
i
i===== Endorsements =====
i
iThiem has been represented by Herwig Straka since his split with former coach
iand manager Gunter Bresnik in May 2019.[250] Thiem has been using Babolat
irackets since 2014 and is the face of the Pure Strike line; he was involved
iin
ithe testing and development of the 2019 version which he uses.[251] Adidas is
iThiem's apparel and footwear sponsor.[252][253] Thiem is a Rolex
iTestimonee,[254] and is sponsored by Kia, Sky Sport and Tecnogym.[255][256]
i
iThiem has endorsed Red Bull since 2018,[257] wearing a patch for them and
ioften drinking the energy drink on court. He also participated in their 2020
icharity Wings for Life World Run.[258] Thiem is a brand ambassador for Bank
iAustria, and he has appeared in several advertising campaigns for the
iAustrian
ibank.[259][260]
i
iIn August 2020, Thiem became a brand ambassador for Duravit, a bathroom
imanufacturer.[261][262] In 2021 Thiem became a testimonee and partnered with
iNeoh, a low carbohydrate protein bar start up.[263]
i
i===== Personal life =====
i
iThiem began dating fellow tennis player Kristina Mladenovic in 2017. They
ipublicly confirmed their relationship in May 2018 and split up in November
i2019.[264][265] Thiem has been dating circus performer, socialite and Let's
iDance Germany winner Lili Paul-Roncalli since October 2020.
i
iThiem is a big fan of football and is a Chelsea supporter.[266] He founded
ihis own football club called 1.TFC Matzendorf in 2016, which consists of
ifriends and fellow tennis players who come together a few times a year to
iplay
icharity games.[266][267][268] Thiem supports the environment, donating and
iraising awareness for 4ocean and the WWF.[269] On ocean pollution he said
i"It's one of the biggest problems nowadays that we face, with all the plastic
ipollution. I love nature and I'm trying to support this whenever I can."[270]
iThiem was also part of his apparel sponsor Adidas' 2019 Parley tennis
icollection campaign, the clothing of the collection being made from recycled
iplastic waste collected from beaches and coastlines with the aim to raise
iawareness and help tackle marine pollution.[269] In April 2021, Thiem
iappeared
iin a campaign for bee protection. The project, called Bio Bienen Apfel, aims
ito raise awareness about creating a habitat for bees in areas of Germany and
iAustria.[271]
i
i===== Career statistics =====
i
iCurrent through the 2023 French Open.
i
iSource(s): ITF Profile[272] and ATP Profile[7]
i
i===== References =====
i
i===== External links =====
i
i
i
i  ------------- SOURCE ----------------
i
iURL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dominic_Thiem
i
iLICENSE: Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike
i
i=========================================
i
i
i$
Bt:Dominic Thiem - Wikipedia	/x/w/g/https_58__47__47_en_46_wikipedia_46_org_47_wiki_47_Dominic_95_Thiem	texopher.com	70
