i
1[?] Read Details	/x/w/gd/https_58__47__47_en_46_wikipedia_46_org_47_wiki_47_Italy	texopher.com	70
i
i===== Contents =====
i
i– in Europe (light green & dark grey) – in the European Union (light green) –
i[Legend]
i
iItaly (Italian: Italia [iˈtaːlja] (listen)), officially the Italian
iRepublic[a][11][12] or the Republic of Italy,[13][14] is a country in
iSouthern[15][16][17] and Western[18][note 1] Europe. Located in the middle of
ithe Mediterranean Sea, it consists of a peninsula delimited by the Alps and
isurrounded by several islands; its territory largely coincides with the
ihomonymous geographical region.[19] Italy shares land borders with France,
iSwitzerland, Austria, Slovenia and the enclaved microstates of Vatican City
iand San Marino. It has a territorial exclave in Switzerland, Campione, and
isome islands in the African Plate. Italy covers an area of 301,230 km2
i(116,310 sq mi), with a population of about 60 million.[20] It is the
ithird-most populous member state of the European Union, the sixth-most
ipopulous country in Europe, and the tenth-largest country in the continent by
iland area. Italy's capital and largest city is Rome.
i
iItaly was the native place of civilizations such as the Italic peoples and
ithe Etruscans, while due to its central geographic location in Southern
iEurope
iand the Mediterranean, the country has also historically been home to myriad
ipeoples and cultures, who immigrated to the peninsula throughout
ihistory.[21][22] The Latins, native of central Italy, formed the Roman
iKingdom
iin the 8th century BC, which eventually became a republic with a government
iof
ithe Senate and the People. The Roman Republic initially conquered and
iassimilated its neighbours on the Italian peninsula, eventually expanding and
iconquering a large part of Europe, North Africa and Western Asia. By the
ifirst
icentury BC, the Roman Empire emerged as the dominant power in the
iMediterranean Basin and became a leading cultural, political and religious
icentre, inaugurating the Pax Romana, a period of more than 200 years during
iwhich law, technology, economy, art, and literature developed.[23][24]
i
iDuring the Early Middle Ages, Italy endured the fall of the Western Roman
iEmpire and the Barbarian Invasions, but by the 11th century, numerous
icity-states and maritime republics, mostly in the North, became prosperous
ithrough trade, commerce, and banking, laying the groundwork for modern
icapitalism.[25][26] The Renaissance began in Florence and spread to the rest
iof Europe, bringing a renewed interest in humanism, science, exploration, and
iart. During the Middle Ages, Italian explorers discovered new routes to the
iFar East and the New World, helping to usher in the European Age of
iDiscovery.
iHowever, centuries of rivalry and infighting between the Italian city-states,
iand the invasions of other European powers during the Italian Wars of the
i15th
iand 16th centuries, left Italy politically fragmented.[27][28] Italy's
icommercial and political power significantly waned during the 17th and 18th
icenturies with the decline of the Catholic Church and the increasing
iimportance of trade routes that bypassed the Mediterranean.[29]
i
iBy the mid-19th century, rising Italian nationalism, along with other social,
ieconomic, and military events, led to a period of revolutionary political
iupheaval.[30] After centuries of political and territorial divisions, Italy
iwas almost entirely unified in 1861 following a war of independence,
iestablishing the Kingdom of Italy.[31] From the late 19th century to the
iearly
i20th century, Italy rapidly industrialised, mainly in the north, and acquired
ia colonial empire,[32] while the south remained largely impoverished and
iexcluded from industrialisation, fuelling a large and influential
idiaspora.[33] Despite being one of the victorious allied powers in World War
iI, Italy entered a period of economic crisis and social turmoil, leading to
ithe rise of the Italian fascist dictatorship in 1922. The participation of
iItaly in World War II on the Axis led to the Italian surrender to Allied
ipowers and its occupation by Nazi Germany helped by Fascists, followed by the
irise of the Italian Resistance and the subsequent Italian Civil War and
iliberation of Italy. After the war, the country abolished its monarchy,
iestablished a democratic unitary parliamentary republic, and enjoyed a
iprolonged economic boom, becoming a major advanced economy.[34]
i
iItaly has the eighth-largest nominal GDP (third in the European Union) in the
iworld, the ninth-largest national wealth and the third-largest central bank
igold reserve. The country has been described as the "least of the great
ipowers", and it has a significant role in regional[35][36] and global[37][38]
ieconomic, military, cultural, and diplomatic affairs. Italy is a founding and
ileading member of the European Union and a member of numerous international
iinstitutions, including the United Nations, NATO, the OECD, the G7, the Latin
iUnion, the Schengen Area, and many more. The source of many inventions and
idiscoveries, the country is considered a cultural superpower and has long
ibeen
ia global centre of art, music, literature, philosophy, science and
itechnology,
itourism and fashion, as well as having greatly influenced and contributed to
idiverse fields including cinema, cuisine, sports, jurisprudence, banking, and
ibusiness.[39] It has the world's largest number of World Heritage Sites (58),
iand is the world's fifth-most visited country.
i
i===== Name =====
i
iHypotheses for the etymology of the name "Italia" are numerous.[40] One is
ithat it was borrowed via Ancient Greek from the Oscan Víteliú 'land of
icalves'
i(cf. Lat vitulus "calf", Umb vitlo "calf").[41] Ancient Greek historian
iDionysius of Halicarnassus states this account together with the legend that
iItaly was named after Italus,[42] mentioned also by Aristotle[43] and
iThucydides.[44]
i
iAccording to Antiochus of Syracuse, the term Italy was used by the ancient
iGreeks to initially refer only to the southern portion of the Bruttium
ipeninsula corresponding to the modern province of Reggio and part of the
iprovinces of Catanzaro and Vibo Valentia in southern Italy. Nevertheless, by
ihis time the larger concept of Oenotria and "Italy" had become synonymous,
iand
ithe name also applied to most of Lucania as well. According to Strabo's
iGeographica, before the expansion of the Roman Republic, the name was used by
iancient Greeks to indicate the land between the strait of Messina and the
iline
iconnecting the gulf of Salerno and gulf of Taranto, corresponding roughly to
ithe current region of Calabria. The ancient Greeks gradually came to apply
ithe
iname "Italia" to a larger region[45] In addition to the "Greek Italy" in the
isouth, historians have suggested the existence of an "Etruscan Italy"
icovering
ivariable areas of central Italy.[46]
i
iThe borders of Roman Italy, Italia, are better established. Cato's Origines,
ithe first work of history composed in Latin, described Italy as the entire
ipeninsula south of the Alps.[47] According to Cato and several Roman authors,
ithe Alps formed the "walls of Italy".[48] In 264 BC, Roman Italy extended
ifrom
ithe Arno and Rubicon rivers of the centre-north to the entire south. The
inorthern area of Cisalpine Gaul was occupied by Rome in the 220s BC and
ibecame
iconsidered geographically and de facto part of Italy,[49] but remained
ipolitically and de jure separated. It was legally merged into the
iadministrative unit of Italy in 42 BC by the triumvir Octavian as a
iratification of Caesar's unpublished acts (Acta
iCaesaris).[50][51][52][53][54]
iThe islands of Sardinia, Corsica, Sicily and Malta were added to Italy by
iDiocletian in 292 AD,[55] coinciding with the whole Italian geographical
iregion.[56] All its inhabitants were considered Italic and Roman.[57]
i
iThe Latin term Italicus was used to describe "a man of Italy" as opposed to a
iprovincial. For example, Pliny the Elder notably wrote in a letter Italicus
ies
ian provincialis? meaning "are you an Italian or a provincial?".[58] The
iadjective italianus, from which are derived the Italian (and also French and
iEnglish) name of the Italians, is medieval and was used alternatively with
iItalicus during the early modern period.[59]
i
iAfter the fall of the Western Roman Empire, which was caused by the invasion
iof the Ostrogoths, the Kingdom of Italy was created. After the Lombard
iinvasions, "Italia" was retained as the name for their kingdom, and for its
isuccessor kingdom within the Holy Roman Empire, which nominally lasted until
i1806, although it had de facto disintegrated due to factional politics
ipitting
ithe empire against the ascendant city republics in the 13th century.[60]
i
i===== History =====
i
iThousands of Lower Paleolithic artefacts have been recovered from Monte
iPoggiolo, dating as far back as 850,000 years.[62] Excavations throughout
iItaly revealed a Neanderthal presence dating back to the Middle Palaeolithic
iperiod some 200,000 years ago,[63] while modern humans appeared about 40,000
iyears ago at Riparo Mochi.[64] Archaeological sites from this period include
iAddaura cave, Altamura, Ceprano, and Gravina in Puglia.[65]
i
iThe Ancient peoples of pre-Roman Italy – such as the Umbrians, the Latins
i(from which the Romans emerged), Volsci, Oscans, Samnites, Sabines, the
iCelts,
ithe Ligures, the Veneti, the Iapygians, and many others – were Indo-European
ipeoples, most of them specifically of the Italic group. The main historic
ipeoples of possible non-Indo-European or pre-Indo-European heritage include
ithe Etruscans of central and northern Italy, the Elymians and the Sicani in
iSicily, and the prehistoric Sardinians, who gave birth to the Nuragic
icivilisation. Other ancient populations being of undetermined language
ifamilies and of possible non-Indo-European origin include the Rhaetian people
iand Cammuni, known for their rock carvings in Valcamonica, the largest
icollections of prehistoric petroglyphs in the world.[66] A well-preserved
inatural mummy known as Ötzi the Iceman, determined to be 5,000 years old
i(between 3400 and 3100 BCE, Copper Age), was discovered in the Similaun
iglacier of South Tyrol in 1991.[67]
i
iThe first foreign colonisers were the Phoenicians, who initially established
icolonies and founded various emporiums on the coasts of Sicily and Sardinia.
iSome of these soon became small urban centres and were developed parallel to
ithe ancient Greek colonies; among the main centres there were the cities of
iMotya, Zyz (modern Palermo), Soluntum in Sicily, and Nora, Sulci, and Tharros
iin Sardinia.[68]
i
iBetween the 17th and the 11th centuries BC Mycenaean Greeks established
icontacts with Italy[69][70][71] and in the 8th and 7th centuries BC a number
iof Greek colonies were established all along the coast of Sicily and the
isouthern part of the Italian Peninsula, that became known as Magna
iGraecia.[72]
i
iIonian settlers founded Elaia, Kyme, Rhegion, Naxos, Zankles, Hymera, and
iKatane. Doric colonists founded Taras, Syrakousai, Megara Hyblaia, Leontinoi,
iAkragas, Ghelas; the Syracusans founded Ankón and Adria; the megarese founded
iSelinunte. The Achaeans founded Sybaris, Poseidonia, Kroton, Lokroi
iEpizephyrioi, and Metapontum; tarantini and thuriots found Herakleia. The
iGreek colonization placed the Italic peoples in contact with democratic forms
iof government and with high artistic and cultural expressions.[73]
i
iRome, a settlement around a ford on the river Tiber in central Italy
iconventionally founded in 753 BC, was ruled for a period of 244 years by a
imonarchical system, initially with sovereigns of Latin and Sabine origin,
ilater by Etruscan kings. The tradition handed down seven kings: Romulus, Numa
iPompilius, Tullus Hostilius, Ancus Marcius, Tarquinius Priscus, Servius
iTullius and Tarquinius Superbus. In 509 BC, the Romans expelled the last king
ifrom their city, favouring a government of the Senate and the People (SPQR)
iand establishing an oligarchic republic.
i
iThe Italian Peninsula, named Italia, was consolidated into a single entity
iduring the Roman expansion and conquest of new lands at the expense of the
iother Italic tribes, Etruscans, Celts, and Greeks. A permanent association
iwith most of the local tribes and cities was formed, and Rome began the
iconquest of Western Europe, Northern Africa and the Middle East. In the wake
iof Julius Caesar's rise and death in the first century BC, Rome grew over the
icourse of centuries into a massive empire stretching from Britain to the
iborders of Persia, and engulfing the whole Mediterranean basin, in which
iGreek
iand Roman and many other cultures merged into a unique civilisation. The long
iand triumphant reign of the first emperor, Augustus, began a golden age of
ipeace and prosperity. Roman Italy remained the metropole of the empire, and
ias
ithe homeland of the Romans and the territory of the capital, maintained a
ispecial status which made it Domina Provinciarum ("ruler of the provinces",
ithe latter being all the remaining territories outside Italy).[74][75][76]
iMore than two centuries of stability followed, during which Italy was
ireferred
ito as the Rectrix Mundi ("governor of the world") and Omnium Terrarum Parens
i("parent of all lands").[77]
i
iThe Roman Empire was among the most powerful economic, cultural, political
iand military forces in the world of its time, and it was one of the largest
iempires in world history. At its height under Trajan, it covered 5 million
isquare kilometres.[78][79] The Roman legacy has deeply influenced Western
icivilisation, shaping most of the modern world; among the many legacies of
iRoman dominance are the widespread use of the Romance languages derived from
iLatin, the numerical system, the modern Western alphabet and calendar, and
ithe
iemergence of Christianity as a major world religion.[80] The Indo-Roman trade
irelations, beginning around the 1st century BCE, testify to extensive Roman
itrade in far away regions; many reminders of the commercial trade between the
iIndian subcontinent and Italy have been found, such as the ivory statuette
iPompeii Lakshmi from the ruins of Pompeii.
i
iIn a slow decline since the third century AD, the Empire split in two in 395
iAD. The Western Empire, under the pressure of the barbarian invasions,
ieventually dissolved in 476 AD when its last emperor, Romulus Augustulus, was
ideposed by the Germanic chief Odoacer. The Eastern half of the Empire
isurvived
ifor another thousand years.
i
iAfter the fall of the Western Roman Empire, Italy fell under the power of
iOdoacer's kingdom, and, later, was seized by the Ostrogoths,[81] followed in
ithe 6th century by a brief reconquest under Byzantine Emperor Justinian. The
iinvasion of another Germanic tribe, the Lombards, late in the same century,
ireduced the Byzantine presence to the rump realm of the Exarchate of Ravenna
iand started the end of political unity of the peninsula for the next 1,300
iyears. The peninsula was therefore divided as follows: northern Italy and
iTuscany formed the Lombard kingdom, with its capital in Pavia, while in
icentral-southern Italy the Lombards controlled the duchies of Spoleto and
iBenevento. The remaining part of the peninsula remained under the Byzantines
iand was divided between the exarchate of Italy, based in Ravenna, the Duchy
iof
iRome, the Duchy of Naples, the Duchy of Calabria and Sicily, the latter
idirectly dependent on the Emperor of Constantinople.[82] Invasions of the
ipeninsula caused a chaotic succession of barbarian kingdoms and the so-called
i"dark ages". The Lombard kingdom was subsequently absorbed into the Frankish
iEmpire by Charlemagne in the late 8th century and became the Kingdom of
iItaly.[83] The Franks also helped the formation of the Papal States in
icentral
iItaly. Until the 13th century, Italian politics was dominated by the
irelations
ibetween the Holy Roman Emperors and the Papacy, with most of the Italian
icity-states siding with the former (Ghibellines) or with the latter (Guelphs)
ifor momentary convenience.[84]
i
iThe Germanic Emperor and the Roman Pontiff became the universal powers of
imedieval Europe. However, the conflict over the investiture controversy (a
iconflict between two radically different views of whether secular authorities
isuch as kings, counts, or dukes, had any legitimate role in appointments to
iecclesiastical offices) and the clash between Guelphs and Ghibellines led to
ithe end of the Imperial-feudal system in the north of Italy where city-states
igained independence. It was during this chaotic era that Italian towns saw
ithe
irise of a peculiar institution, the medieval commune. Given the power vacuum
icaused by extreme territorial fragmentation and the struggle between the
iEmpire and the Holy See, local communities sought autonomous ways to maintain
ilaw and order.[86] The investiture controversy was finally resolved by the
iConcordat of Worms. In 1176 a league of city-states, the Lombard League,
idefeated the German emperor Frederick Barbarossa at the Battle of Legnano,
ithus ensuring effective independence for most of northern and central Italian
icities.
i
iItalian city-states such as Milan, Florence and Venice played a crucial
iinnovative role in financial development, devising the main instruments and
ipractices of banking and the emergence of new forms of social and economic
iorganization.[87] In coastal and southern areas, the maritime republics grew
ito eventually dominate the Mediterranean and monopolise trade routes to the
iOrient. They were independent thalassocratic city-states, though most of them
ioriginated from territories once belonging to the Byzantine Empire. All these
icities during the time of their independence had similar systems of
igovernment
iin which the merchant class had considerable power. Although in practice
ithese
iwere oligarchical, and bore little resemblance to a modern democracy, the
irelative political freedom they afforded was conducive to academic and
iartistic advancement.[88] The four best known maritime republics were Venice,
iGenoa, Pisa and Amalfi; the others were Ancona, Gaeta, Noli, and
iRagusa.[89][90][91] Each of the maritime republics had dominion over
idifferent
ioverseas lands, including many Mediterranean islands (especially Sardinia and
iCorsica), lands on the Adriatic, Aegean, and Black Sea (Crimea), and
icommercial colonies in the Near East and in North Africa. Venice maintained
ienormous tracts of land in Greece, Cyprus, Istria, and Dalmatia until as late
ias the mid-17th century.[92]
i
iVenice and Genoa were Europe's main gateways to trade with the East, and
iproducers of fine glass, while Florence was a capital of silk, wool, banking,
iand jewellery. The wealth such business brought to Italy meant that large
ipublic and private artistic projects could be commissioned. The republics
iwere
iheavily involved in the Crusades, providing support and transport, but most
iespecially taking advantage of the political and trading opportunities
iresulting from these wars.[88] Italy first felt the huge economic changes in
iEurope which led to the commercial revolution: the Republic of Venice was
iable
ito defeat the Byzantine Empire and finance the voyages of Marco Polo to Asia;
ithe first universities were formed in Italian cities, and scholars such as
iThomas Aquinas obtained international fame; Frederick I of Sicily made Italy
ithe political-cultural centre of a reign that temporarily included the Holy
iRoman Empire and the Kingdom of Jerusalem; capitalism and banking families
iemerged in Florence, where Dante and Giotto were active around 1300.[25]
i
iIn the south, Sicily had become an Arab Islamic emirate in the 9th century,
ithriving until the Italo-Normans conquered it in the late 11th century
itogether with most of the Lombard and Byzantine principalities of southern
iItaly.[93] Through a complex series of events, southern Italy developed as a
iunified kingdom, first under the House of Hohenstaufen, then under the
iCapetian House of Anjou and, from the 15th century, the House of Aragon. In
iSardinia, the former Byzantine provinces became independent states known in
iItalian as Judicates, although some parts of the island fell under Genoese or
iPisan rule until eventual Aragonese annexation in the 15th century. The Black
iDeath pandemic of 1348 left its mark on Italy by killing perhaps one third of
ithe population.[94][95] However, the recovery from the plague led to a
iresurgence of cities, trade, and economy, which allowed the blossoming of
iHumanism and Renaissance that later spread to Europe.
i
iItaly was the birthplace and heart of the Renaissance during the 1400s and
i1500s. The Italian Renaissance marked the transition from the medieval period
ito the modern age as Europe recovered, economically and culturally, from the
icrises of the Late Middle Ages and entered the Early Modern Period. The
iItalian polities were now regional states effectively ruled by Princes, de
ifacto monarchs in control of trade and administration, and their courts
ibecame
imajor centres of the Arts and Sciences. The Italian princedoms represented a
ifirst form of modern states as opposed to feudal monarchies and multinational
iempires. The princedoms were led by political dynasties and merchant families
isuch as the Medici in Florence, the Visconti and Sforza in the Duchy of
iMilan,
ithe Doria in the Republic of Genoa, the Loredan, Mocenigo and Barbarigo in
ithe
iRepublic of Venice, the Este in Ferrara, and the Gonzaga in Mantua.[96][97]
iThe Renaissance was therefore a result of the wealth accumulated by Italian
imerchant cities combined with the patronage of its dominant families.[96]
iItalian Renaissance exercised a dominant influence on subsequent European
ipainting and sculpture for centuries afterwards, with artists such as
iLeonardo
ida Vinci, Brunelleschi, Botticelli, Michelangelo, Raphael, Giotto, Donatello,
iand Titian, and architects such as Filippo Brunelleschi, Leon Battista
iAlberti, Andrea Palladio, and Donato Bramante.
i
iFollowing the conclusion of the western schism in favour of Rome at the
iCouncil of Constance (1415–1417), the new Pope Martin V returned to the Papal
iStates after a three years-long journey that touched many Italian cities and
irestored Italy as the sole centre of Western Christianity. During the course
iof this voyage, the Medici Bank was made the official credit institution of
ithe Papacy, and several significant ties were established between the Church
iand the new political dynasties of the peninsula. The Popes' status as
ielective monarchs turned the conclaves and consistories of the Renaissance
iinto political battles between the courts of Italy for primacy in the
ipeninsula and access to the immense resources of the Catholic Church. In
i1439,
iPope Eugenius IV and the Byzantine Emperor John VIII Palaiologos signed a
ireconciliation agreement between the Catholic Church and the Orthodox Church
iat the Council of Florence hosted by Cosimo the old de Medici. In 1453,
iItalian forces under Giovanni Giustiniani were sent by Pope Nicholas V to
idefend the Walls of Constantinople but the decisive battle was lost to the
imore advanced Turkish army equipped with cannons, and Byzantium fell to
iSultan
iMehmed II.
i
iThe fall of Constantinople led to the migration of Greek scholars and texts
ito Italy, fueling the rediscovery of Greco-Roman Humanism.[98][99][100]
iHumanist rulers such as Federico da Montefeltro and Pope Pius II worked to
iestablish ideal cities where man is the measure of all things, and therefore
ifounded Urbino and Pienza respectively. Pico della Mirandola wrote the
iOration
ion the Dignity of Man, considered the manifesto of Renaissance Humanism, in
iwhich he stressed the importance of free will in human beings. The humanist
ihistorian Leonardo Bruni was the first to divide human history in three
iperiods: Antiquity, Middle Ages and Modernity.[101] The second consequence of
ithe Fall of Constantinople was the beginning of the Age of Discovery.
i
iItalian[note 2] explorers and navigators from the dominant maritime
irepublics, eager to find an alternative route to the Indies in order to
ibypass
ithe Ottoman Empire, offered their services to monarchs of Atlantic countries
iand played a key role in ushering the Age of Discovery and the European
icolonization of the Americas. The most notable among them were: Christopher
iColumbus (Italian: Cristoforo Colombo), colonizer in the name of Spain, who
iis
icredited with discovering the New World and the opening of the Americas for
iconquest and settlement by Europeans;[102] John Cabot (Italian: Giovanni
iCaboto), sailing for England, who was the first European to set foot in "New
iFound Land" and explore parts of the North American continent in 1497;[103]
iAmerigo Vespucci, sailing for Portugal, who first demonstrated in about 1501
ithat the New World (in particular Brazil) was not Asia as initially
iconjectured, but a fourth continent previously unknown to people of the Old
iWorld (America is named after him);[104] and Giovanni da Verrazzano, at the
iservice of France, renowned as the first European to explore the Atlantic
icoast of North America between Florida and New Brunswick in 1524.[105]
i
iFollowing the fall of Constantinople, the wars in Lombardy came to an end and
ia defensive alliance known as Italic League was formed between Venice,
iNaples,
iFlorence, Milan, and the Papacy. Lorenzo the Magnificent de Medici was the
igreatest Florentine patron of the Renaissance and supporter of the Italic
iLeague. He notably avoided the collapse of the League in the aftermath of the
iPazzi Conspiracy and during the aborted invasion of Italy by the Turks.
iHowever, the military campaign of Charles VIII of France in Italy caused the
iend of the Italic League and initiated the Italian Wars between the Valois
iand
ithe Habsburgs. During the High Renaissance of the 1500s, Italy was therefore
iboth the main European battleground and the cultural-economic centre of the
icontinent. Popes such as Julius II (1503–1513) fought for the control of
iItaly
iagainst foreign monarchs, others such as Paul III (1534–1549) preferred to
imediate between the European powers in order to secure peace in Italy. In the
imiddle of this conflict, the Medici popes Leo X (1513–1521) and Clement VII
i(1523–1534) opposed the Protestant reformation and advanced the interests of
itheir family. In 1559, at the end of the French invasions of Italy and of the
iItalian wars, the many states of northern Italy remained part of the Holy
iRoman Empire, indirectly subject to the Austrian Habsburgs, while all of
iSouthern Italy (Naples, Sicily, Sardinia) and Milan were under Spanish
iHabsburg rule.
i
iThe Papacy remained a powerful force and launched the Counter-reformation.
iKey events of the period include: the Council of Trent (1545–1563); the
iexcommunication of Elizabeth I (1570) and the Battle of Lepanto (1571), both
ioccurring during the pontificate of Pius V; the construction of the Gregorian
iobservatory, the adoption of the Gregorian calendar, and the Jesuit China
imission of Matteo Ricci under Pope Gregory XIII; the French Wars of Religion;
ithe Long Turkish War and the execution of Giordano Bruno in 1600, under Pope
iClement VIII; the birth of the Lyncean Academy of the Papal States, of which
ithe main figure was Galileo Galilei (later put on trial); the final phases of
ithe Thirty Years' War (1618–1648) during the pontificates of Urban VIII and
iInnocent X; and the formation of the last Holy League by Innocent XI during
ithe Great Turkish War.
i
iThe Italian economy declined during the 1600s and 1700s, as the peninsula was
iexcluded from the rising Atlantic slave trade. Following the European wars of
isuccession of the 18th century, the south passed to a cadet branch of the
iSpanish Bourbons and the North fell under the influence of the
iHabsburg-Lorraine of Austria. During the Coalition Wars, northern-central
iItaly was reorganised by Napoleon in a number of Sister Republics of France
iand later as a Kingdom of Italy in personal union with the French
iEmpire.[106]
iThe southern half of the peninsula was administered by Joachim Murat,
iNapoleon's brother-in-law, who was crowned as King of Naples. The 1814
iCongress of Vienna restored the situation of the late 18th century, but the
iideals of the French Revolution could not be eradicated, and soon re-surfaced
iduring the political upheavals that characterised the first part of the 19th
icentury.
i
iDuring the Napoleonic era, in 1797, the first official adoption of the
iItalian tricolour as a national flag by a sovereign Italian state, the
iCispadane Republic, a Napoleonic sister republic of Revolutionary France,
itook
iplace, on the basis of the events following the French Revolution (1789–1799)
iwhich, among its ideals, advocated the national self-determination.[107][108]
iThis event is celebrated by the Tricolour Day.[109] The Italian national
icolours appeared for the first time on a tricolour cockade in 1789,[110]
ianticipating by seven years the first green, white and red Italian military
iwar flag, which was adopted by the Lombard Legion in 1796.[111]
i
iThe birth of the Kingdom of Italy was the result of efforts by Italian
inationalists and monarchists loyal to the House of Savoy to establish a
iunited
ikingdom encompassing the entire Italian Peninsula. Following the Congress of
iVienna in 1815, the political and social Italian unification movement, or
iRisorgimento, emerged to unite Italy consolidating the different states of
ithe
ipeninsula and liberate it from foreign control. A prominent radical figure
iwas
ithe patriotic journalist Giuseppe Mazzini, member of the secret revolutionary
isociety Carbonari and founder of the influential political movement Young
iItaly in the early 1830s, who favoured a unitary republic and advocated a
ibroad nationalist movement. His prolific output of propaganda helped the
iunification movement stay active.
i
iIn this context, in 1847, the first public performance of the song Il Canto
idegli Italiani, the Italian national anthem since 1946, took place.[114][115]
iIl Canto degli Italiani, written by Goffredo Mameli set to music by Michele
iNovaro, is also known as the Inno di Mameli, after the author of the lyrics,
ior Fratelli d'Italia, from its opening line.
i
iThe most famous member of Young Italy was the revolutionary and general
iGiuseppe Garibaldi, renowned for his extremely loyal followers,[116] who led
ithe Italian republican drive for unification in Southern Italy. However, the
iNorthern Italy monarchy of the House of Savoy in the Kingdom of Sardinia,
iwhose government was led by Camillo Benso, Count of Cavour, also had
iambitions
iof establishing a united Italian state. In the context of the 1848 liberal
irevolutions that swept through Europe, an unsuccessful first war of
iindependence was declared on Austria. In 1855, the Kingdom of Sardinia became
ian ally of Britain and France in the Crimean War, giving Cavour's diplomacy
ilegitimacy in the eyes of the great powers.[117][118] The Kingdom of Sardinia
iagain attacked the Austrian Empire in the Second Italian War of Independence
iof 1859, with the aid of France, resulting in liberating Lombardy. On the
ibasis of the Plombières Agreement, the Kingdom of Sardinia ceded Savoy and
iNice to France, an event that caused the Niçard exodus, that was the
iemigration of a quarter of the Niçard Italians to Italy,[119] and the Niçard
iVespers.
i
iIn 1860–1861, Garibaldi led the drive for unification in Naples and Sicily
i(the Expedition of the Thousand),[120] while the House of Savoy troops
ioccupied the central territories of the Italian peninsula, except Rome and
ipart of Papal States. Teano was the site of the famous meeting of 26 October
i1860 between Giuseppe Garibaldi and Victor Emmanuel II, last King of
iSardinia,
iin which Garibaldi shook Victor Emanuel's hand and hailed him as King of
iItaly; thus, Garibaldi sacrificed republican hopes for the sake of Italian
iunity under a monarchy. Cavour agreed to include Garibaldi's Southern Italy
iallowing it to join the union with the Kingdom of Sardinia in 1860. This
iallowed the Sardinian government to declare a united Italian kingdom on 17
iMarch 1861.[121] Victor Emmanuel II then became the first king of a united
iItaly, and the capital was moved from Turin to Florence. The title of "King
iof
iItaly" had been out of use since the abdication of Napoleon I of France on 6
iApril 1814.
i
iIn 1866, Victor Emmanuel II allied with Prussia during the Austro-Prussian
iWar, waging the Third Italian War of Independence which allowed Italy to
iannexe Venetia. Finally, in 1870, as France abandoned its garrisons in Rome
iduring the disastrous Franco-Prussian War to keep the large Prussian Army at
ibay, the Italians rushed to fill the power gap by taking over the Papal
iStates. Italian unification was completed and shortly afterwards Italy's
icapital was moved to Rome. Victor Emmanuel, Garibaldi, Cavour, and Mazzini
ihave been referred as Italy's Four Fathers of the Fatherland.[112]
i
iThe new Kingdom of Italy obtained Great Power status. The Constitutional Law
iof the Kingdom of Sardinia the Albertine Statute of 1848, was extended to the
iwhole Kingdom of Italy in 1861, and provided for basic freedoms of the new
iState, but electoral laws excluded the non-propertied and uneducated classes
ifrom voting. The government of the new kingdom took place in a framework of
iparliamentary constitutional monarchy dominated by liberal forces. As
iNorthern
iItaly quickly industrialised, the South and rural areas of the North remained
iunderdeveloped and overpopulated, forcing millions of people to migrate
iabroad
iand fuelling a large and influential diaspora. The Italian Socialist Party
iconstantly increased in strength, challenging the traditional liberal and
iconservative establishment.
i
iStarting in the last two decades of the 19th century, Italy developed into a
icolonial power by forcing under its rule Eritrea and Somalia in East Africa,
iTripolitania and Cyrenaica in North Africa (later unified in the colony of
iLibya) and the Dodecanese islands.[122] From 2 November 1899 to 7 September
i1901, Italy also participated as part of the Eight-Nation Alliance forces
iduring the Boxer Rebellion in China; on 7 September 1901, a concession in
iTientsin was ceded to the country, and on 7 June 1902, the concession was
itaken into Italian possession and administered by a consul. In 1913, male
iuniversal suffrage was adopted. The pre-war period dominated by Giovanni
iGiolitti, Prime Minister five times between 1892 and 1921, was characterised
iby the economic, industrial, and political-cultural modernization of Italian
isociety.
i
iItaly entered into the First World War in 1915 with the aim of completing
inational unity: for this reason, the Italian intervention in the First World
iWar is also considered the Fourth Italian War of Independence,[123] in a
ihistoriographical perspective that identifies in the latter the conclusion of
ithe unification of Italy, whose military actions began during the revolutions
iof 1848 with the First Italian War of Independence.[124][125]
i
iItaly, nominally allied with the German Empire and the Empire of
iAustria-Hungary in the Triple Alliance, in 1915 joined the Allies into World
iWar I with a promise of substantial territorial gains, that included western
iInner Carniola, former Austrian Littoral, Dalmatia as well as parts of the
iOttoman Empire. The country gave a fundamental contribution to the victory of
ithe conflict as one of the "Big Four" top Allied powers. The war on the
iItalian Front was initially inconclusive, as the Italian army got stuck in a
ilong attrition war in the Alps, making little progress and suffering heavy
ilosses. However, the reorganization of the army and the conscription of the
iso-called '99 Boys (Ragazzi del '99, all males born in 1899 who were turning
i18) led to more effective Italian victories in major battles, such as on
iMonte
iGrappa and in a series of battles on the Piave river. Eventually, in October
i1918, the Italians launched a massive offensive, culminating in the victory
iof
iVittorio Veneto. The Italian victory,[126][127][128] which was announced by
ithe Bollettino della Vittoria and the Bollettino della Vittoria Navale,
imarked
ithe end of the war on the Italian Front, secured the dissolution of the
iAustro-Hungarian Empire and was chiefly instrumental in ending the First
iWorld
iWar less than two weeks later. Italian armed forces were also involved in the
iAfrican theatre, the Balkan theatre, the Middle Eastern theatre, and then
itook
ipart in the Occupation of Constantinople.
i
iDuring the war, more than 650,000 Italian soldiers and as many civilians
idied,[129] and the kingdom went to the brink of bankruptcy. The Treaty of
iSaint-Germain-en-Laye (1919) and the Treaty of Rapallo (1920) allowed the
iannexation of Trentino Alto-Adige, Julian March, Istria, Kvarner as well as
ithe Dalmatian city of Zara. The subsequent Treaty of Rome (1924) led to the
iannexation of the city of Fiume to Italy. Italy did not receive other
iterritories promised by the Treaty of London (1915), so this outcome was
idenounced as a Mutilated victory. The rhetoric of Mutilated victory was
iadopted by Benito Mussolini and led to the rise of Italian fascism, becoming
ia
ikey point in the propaganda of Fascist Italy. Historians regard Mutilated
ivictory as a "political myth", used by fascists to fuel Italian imperialism
iand obscure the successes of liberal Italy in the aftermath of World War
iI.[130] Italy also gained a permanent seat in the League of Nations's
iexecutive council.
i
iThe socialist agitations that followed the devastation of the Great War,
iinspired by the Russian Revolution, led to counter-revolution and repression
ithroughout Italy. The liberal establishment, fearing a Soviet-style
irevolution, started to endorse the small National Fascist Party, led by
iBenito
iMussolini. In October 1922 the Blackshirts of the National Fascist Party
iattempted a mass demonstration and a coup named the "March on Rome" which
ifailed but at the last minute, King Victor Emmanuel III refused to proclaim a
istate of siege and appointed Mussolini prime minister, thereby transferring
ipolitical power to the fascists without armed conflict.[131][132] Over the
inext few years, Mussolini banned all political parties and curtailed personal
iliberties, thus forming a dictatorship. These actions attracted international
iattention and eventually inspired similar dictatorships such as Nazi Germany
iand Francoist Spain.
i
iItalian Fascism is based upon Italian nationalism and imperialism, and in
iparticular seeks to complete what it considers as the incomplete project of
ithe unification of Italy by incorporating Italia Irredenta (unredeemed Italy)
iinto the state of Italy.[133][134] To the east of Italy, the Fascists claimed
ithat Dalmatia was a land of Italian culture whose Italians, including those
iof
iItalianized South Slavic descent, had been driven out of Dalmatia and into
iexile in Italy, and supported the return of Italians of Dalmatian
iheritage.[135] Mussolini identified Dalmatia as having strong Italian
icultural
iroots for centuries, similarly to Istria, via the Roman Empire and the
iRepublic of Venice.[136] To the south of Italy, the Fascists claimed Malta,
iwhich belonged to the United Kingdom, and Corfu, which instead belonged to
iGreece; to the north claimed Italian Switzerland, while to the west claimed
iCorsica, Nice, and Savoy, which belonged to France.[137][138] The Fascist
iregime produced literature on Corsica that presented evidence of the island's
iitalianità.[139] The Fascist regime produced literature on Nice that
ijustified
ithat Nice was an Italian land based on historic, ethnic, and linguistic
igrounds.[139]
i
iThe Armistice of Villa Giusti, which ended fighting between Italy and
iAustria-Hungary at the end of World War I, resulted in Italian annexation of
ineighbouring parts of Yugoslavia. During the interwar period, the fascist
iItalian government undertook a campaign of Italianisation in the areas it
iannexed, which suppressed Slavic language, schools, political parties, and
icultural institutions. Between 1922 and the beginning of World War II, the
iaffected people were also the German-speaking and Ladin-speaking populations
iof Trentino-Alto Adige, and the French- and Arpitan-speaking regions of the
iwestern Alps, such as the Aosta valley.[140]
i
iMussolini promised to bring Italy back as a great power in Europe, building a
i"New Roman Empire"[141] and holding power over the Mediterranean Sea. In
ipropaganda, Fascists used the ancient Roman motto "Mare Nostrum" (Latin for
i"Our Sea") to describe the Mediterranean. For this reason the Fascist regime
iengaged in interventionist foreign policy. In 1923, the Greek island of Corfu
iwas briefly occupied by Italy, after the assassination of General Tellini in
iGreek territory. In 1925, Italy forced Albania to become a de facto
iprotectorate. In 1935, Mussolini invaded Ethiopia and founded Italian East
iAfrica, resulting in an international alienation and leading to Italy's
iwithdrawal from the League of Nations; Italy allied with Nazi Germany and the
iEmpire of Japan and strongly supported Francisco Franco in the Spanish civil
iwar. In 1939, Italy formally annexed Albania. Italy entered World War II on
i10
iJune 1940. The Italians initially advanced in British Somaliland, Egypt, the
iBalkans (establishing the Governorate of Dalmatia and Montenegro, the
iProvince
iof Ljubljana, and the puppet states Independent State of Croatia and Hellenic
iState), and eastern fronts. They were, however, subsequently defeated on the
iEastern Front as well as in the East African campaign and the North African
icampaign, losing as a result their territories in Africa and in the Balkans.
i
iDuring World War II, Italian war crimes included extrajudicial killings and
iethnic cleansing[142] by deportation of about 25,000 people, mainly Jews,
iCroats, and Slovenians, to the Italian concentration camps, such as Rab,
iGonars, Monigo, Renicci di Anghiari, and elsewhere. Yugoslav Partisans
iperpetrated their own crimes against the local ethnic Italian population
i(Istrian Italians and Dalmatian Italians) during and after the war, including
ithe foibe massacres. In Italy and Yugoslavia, unlike in Germany, few war
icrimes were prosecuted.[143][144][145][146]
i
iAn Allied invasion of Sicily began in July 1943, leading to the collapse of
ithe Fascist regime and the fall of Mussolini on 25 July. Mussolini was
ideposed
iand arrested by order of King Victor Emmanuel III in co-operation with the
imajority of the members of the Grand Council of Fascism, which passed a
imotion
iof no confidence. On 8 September, Italy signed the Armistice of Cassibile,
iending its war with the Allies. Shortly thereafter, the Germans, with the
iassistance of the Italian fascists, succeeded in taking control of northern
iand central Italy. The country remained a battlefield for the rest of the
iwar,
iwith the Allies slowly moving up from the south.
i
iIn the north, the Germans set up the Italian Social Republic (RSI), a Nazi
ipuppet state with Mussolini installed as leader after he was rescued by
iGerman
iparatroopers. Some Italian troops in the south were organised into the
iItalian
iCo-belligerent Army, which fought alongside the Allies for the rest of the
iwar, while other Italian troops, loyal to Mussolini and his RSI, continued to
ifight alongside the Germans in the National Republican Army. Also, the
ipost-armistice period saw the rise of a large anti-fascist resistance
imovement, the Resistenza.[147] As result, the country descended into civil
iwar;[148][149] the Italian resistance fought a guerrilla war against the Nazi
iGerman occupiers and Italian Fascist forces,[147] while clashes between the
iFascist RSI Army and the Royalist Italian Co-Belligerent Army were rare.[150]
iIn late April 1945, with total defeat looming, Mussolini attempted to escape
inorth,[151] but was captured and summarily executed near Lake Como by Italian
ipartisans. His body was then taken to Milan, where it was hung upside down at
ia service station for public viewing and to provide confirmation of his
idemise.[152]
i
iHostilities ended on 29 April 1945, when the German forces in Italy
isurrendered. Nearly half a million Italians (including civilians) died in the
iconflict,[153] society was divided and the Italian economy had been all but
idestroyed; per capita income in 1944 was at its lowest point since the
ibeginning of the 20th century.[154] The aftermath of World War II left Italy
ialso with an anger against the monarchy for its endorsement of the Fascist
iregime for the previous twenty years. These frustrations contributed to a
irevival of the Italian republican movement.[155]
i
iItaly became a republic after the 1946 Italian institutional referendum[156]
iheld on 2 June 1946, a day celebrated since as Festa della Repubblica. This
iwas the first time that Italian women voted at the national level, and the
isecond time overall considering the local elections that were held a few
imonths earlier in some cities.[157][158] Victor Emmanuel III's son, Umberto
iII, was forced to abdicate and exiled. The Republican Constitution was
iapproved on 1 January 1948. Under the Treaty of Peace with Italy, 1947,
iIstria, Kvarner, most of the Julian March as well as the Dalmatian city of
iZara was annexed by Yugoslavia causing the Istrian-Dalmatian exodus, which
iled
ito the emigration of between 230,000 and 350,000 of local ethnic Italians
i(Istrian Italians and Dalmatian Italians), the others being ethnic
iSlovenians,
iethnic Croatians, and ethnic Istro-Romanians, choosing to maintain Italian
icitizenship.[159] Later, the Free Territory of Trieste was divided between
ithe
itwo states. Italy also lost all of its colonial possessions, formally ending
ithe Italian Empire. In 1950, Italian Somaliland was made a United Nations
iTrust Territory under Italian administration until 1 July 1960. The Italian
iborder that applies today has existed since 1975, when Trieste was formally
ire-annexed to Italy.
i
iFears of a possible Communist takeover proved crucial for the first universal
isuffrage electoral outcome on 18 April 1948, when the Christian Democrats,
iunder the leadership of Alcide De Gasperi, obtained a landslide
ivictory.[160][161] Consequently, in 1949 Italy became a member of NATO. The
iMarshall Plan helped to revive the Italian economy which, until the late
i1960s, enjoyed a period of sustained economic growth commonly called the
i"Economic Miracle". In the 1950's, Italy became one of the six founding
icountries of the European Communities, following the 1952 establishment of
ithe
iEuropean Coal and Steel Community, and subsequent 1958 creations of the
iEuropean Economic Community and European Atomic Energy Community. In 1993,
ithe
iformer two of these were incorporated into the European Union.
i
iFrom the late 1960s until the early 1980s, the country experienced the Years
iof Lead, a period characterised by economic crisis, especially after the 1973
ioil crisis, widespread social conflicts and terrorist massacres carried out
iby
iopposing extremist groups, with the alleged involvement of US and Soviet
iintelligence.[162][163][164] The Years of Lead culminated in the
iassassination
iof the Christian Democrat leader Aldo Moro in 1978 and the Bologna railway
istation massacre in 1980, where 85 people died.
i
iIn the 1980s, for the first time since 1945, two governments were led by
inon-Christian-Democrat premiers: one republican, Giovanni Spadolini, and one
isocialist, Bettino Craxi; the Christian Democrats remained, however, the main
igovernment party. During Craxi's government, the economy recovered and Italy
ibecame the world's fifth-largest industrial nation after it gained the entry
iinto the Group of Seven in the 1970s. However, as a result of his spending
ipolicies, the Italian national debt skyrocketed during the Craxi era, soon
ipassing 100% of the country's GDP.
i
iItaly faced several terror attacks between 1992 and 1993 perpetrated by the
iSicilian Mafia as a consequence of several life sentences pronounced during
ithe "Maxi Trial", and of the new anti-mafia measures launched by the
igovernment. In 1992, two major dynamite attacks killed the judges Giovanni
iFalcone (23 May in the Capaci bombing) and Paolo Borsellino (19 July in the
iVia D'Amelio bombing).[165] One year later (May–July 1993), tourist spots
iwere
iattacked, such as the Via dei Georgofili in Florence, Via Palestro in Milan,
iand the Piazza San Giovanni in Laterano and Via San Teodoro in Rome, leaving
i10 dead and 93 injured and causing severe damage to cultural heritage such as
ithe Uffizi Gallery. The Catholic Church openly condemned the Mafia, and two
ichurches were bombed and an anti-Mafia priest shot dead in
iRome.[166][167][168]
i
iAlso in the early 1990s, Italy faced significant challenges, as voters –
idisenchanted with political paralysis, massive public debt and the extensive
icorruption system (known as Tangentopoli) uncovered by the Clean Hands (Mani
iPulite) investigation – demanded radical reforms. The scandals involved all
imajor parties, but especially those in the government coalition: the
iChristian
iDemocrats, who ruled for almost 50 years, underwent a severe crisis and
ieventually disbanded, splitting up into several factions.[169] The Communists
ireorganised as a social-democratic force. During the 1990s and the 2000s,
icentre-right (dominated by media magnate Silvio Berlusconi) and centre-left
icoalitions (led by university professor Romano Prodi) alternately governed
ithe
icountry.
i
iAmidst the Great Recession, Berlusconi resigned in 2011, and his conservative
igovernment was replaced by the technocratic cabinet of Mario Monti.[170]
iFollowing the 2013 general election, the Vice-Secretary of the Democratic
iParty Enrico Letta formed a new government at the head of a right-left Grand
icoalition. In 2014, challenged by the new Secretary of the PD Matteo Renzi,
iLetta resigned and was replaced by Renzi. The new government started
iconstitutional reforms such as the abolition of the Senate and a new
ielectoral
ilaw. On 4 December the constitutional reform was rejected in a referendum and
iRenzi resigned; the Foreign Affairs Minister Paolo Gentiloni was appointed
inew
iPrime Minister.[171]
i
iIn the European migrant crisis of the 2010s, Italy was the entry point and
ileading destination for most asylum seekers entering the EU. From 2013 to
i2018, the country took in over 700,000 migrants and refugees,[172] mainly
ifrom
isub-Saharan Africa,[173] which caused strain on the public purse and a surge
iin the support for far-right or euro-sceptic political parties.[174][175] The
i2018 general election was characterised by a strong showing of the Five Star
iMovement and the League and the university professor Giuseppe Conte became
ithe
iPrime Minister at the head of a populist coalition between these two
iparties.[176] However, after only fourteen months the League withdrew its
isupport to Conte, who formed a new unprecedented government coalition between
ithe Five Star Movement and the centre-left.[177][178]
i
iIn 2020, Italy was severely hit by the COVID-19 pandemic.[179] From March to
iMay, Conte's government imposed a national lockdown as a measure to limit the
ispread of the disease,[180][181] while further restrictions were introduced
iduring the following winter.[182] The measures, despite being widely approved
iby the public opinion,[183] were also described as the largest suppression of
iconstitutional rights in the history of the republic.[184][185] With more
ithan
i155,000 confirmed victims, Italy was one of the countries with the highest
itotal number of deaths in the worldwide coronavirus pandemic.[186] The
ipandemic caused also a severe economic disruption, in which Italy resulted as
ione of the most affected countries.[187]
i
iIn February 2021, after a government crisis within his majority, Conte was
iforced to resign and Mario Draghi, former president of the European Central
iBank, formed a national unity government supported by almost all the main
iparties,[188] pledging to oversee implementation of economic stimulus to face
ithe crisis caused by the pandemic.[189] On 22 October 2022, Giorgia Meloni
iwas
isworn in as Italy's first female prime minister. Her Brothers of Italy party
iformed a right-wing government with the far-right League and Berlusconi's
iForza Italia.[190]
i
i===== Geography =====
i
iItaly, whose territory largely coincides with the homonymous geographical
iregion,[19] is located in Southern Europe and it is also considered a part of
iwestern Europe,[18] between latitudes 35° and 47° N, and longitudes 6° and
i19°
iE. To the north, Italy borders France, Switzerland, Austria, and Slovenia and
iis roughly delimited by the Alpine watershed, enclosing the Po Valley and the
iVenetian Plain. To the south, it consists of the entirety of the Italian
iPeninsula and the two Mediterranean islands of Sicily and Sardinia (the two
ibiggest islands of the Mediterranean), in addition to many smaller islands.
iThe sovereign states of San Marino and the Vatican City are enclaves within
iItaly,[191][192] while Campione d'Italia is an Italian exclave in
iSwitzerland.[193]
i
iThe country's total area is 301,230 square kilometres (116,306 sq mi), of
iwhich 294,020 km2 (113,522 sq mi) is land and 7,210 km2 (2,784 sq mi) is
iwater.[194] Including the islands, Italy has a coastline and border of 7,600
ikilometres (4,722 miles) on the Adriatic, Ionian, Tyrrhenian seas (740 km
i(460
imi)), and borders shared with France (488 km (303 mi)), Austria (430 km (267
imi)), Slovenia (232 km (144 mi)) and Switzerland (740 km (460 mi)). San
iMarino
i(39 km (24 mi)) and Vatican City (3.2 km (2.0 mi)), both enclaves, account
ifor
ithe remainder.[194]
i
iOver 35% of the Italian territory is mountainous.[195] The Apennine Mountains
iform the peninsula's backbone, and the Alps form most of its northern
iboundary, where Italy's highest point is located on Mont Blanc (Monte Bianco)
i(4,810 m or 15,780 ft). Other worldwide-known mountains in Italy include the
iMatterhorn (Monte Cervino), Monte Rosa, Gran Paradiso in the West Alps, and
iBernina, Stelvio and Dolomites along the eastern side.
i
iThe Po, Italy's longest river (652 kilometres or 405 miles), flows from the
iAlps on the western border with France and crosses the Padan plain on its way
ito the Adriatic Sea. The Po Valley is the largest plain in Italy, with 46,000
ikm2 (18,000 sq mi), and it represents over 70% of the total plain area in the
icountry.[195]
i
iMany elements of the Italian territory are of volcanic origin. Most of the
ismall islands and archipelagos in the south, like Capraia, Ponza, Ischia,
iEolie, Ustica and Pantelleria are volcanic islands. There are also active
ivolcanoes: Mount Etna in Sicily (the largest active volcano in Europe),
iVulcano, Stromboli, and Vesuvius (the only active volcano on mainland
iEurope).
i
iThe five largest lakes are, in order of diminishing size: Garda (367.94 km2
ior 142 sq mi), Maggiore (212.51 km2 or 82 sq mi, whose minor northern part is
ipart of Switzerland), Como (145.9 km2 or 56 sq mi), Trasimeno (124.29 km2 or
i48 sq mi) and Bolsena (113.55 km2 or 44 sq mi).[196] Four different seas
isurround the Italian Peninsula in the Mediterranean Sea from three sides: the
iAdriatic Sea in the east,[197] the Ionian Sea in the south,[198] and the
iLigurian Sea and the Tyrrhenian Sea in the west.[199] The longest Italian
iriver is the Po, which flows for either 652 km (405 mi) or 682 km (424
imi).[200] Most of the rivers of Italy drain either into the Adriatic Sea or
ithe Tyrrhenian Sea.[201]
i
iAlthough the country includes the Italian peninsula, adjacent islands, and
imost of the southern Alpine basin, some of Italy's territory extends beyond
ithe Alpine basin and some islands are located outside the Eurasian
icontinental
ishelf. These territories are the comuni of: Livigno, Sexten, Innichen,
iToblach
i(in part), Chiusaforte, Tarvisio, Graun im Vinschgau (in part), which are all
ipart of the Danube's drainage basin, while the Val di Lei constitutes part of
ithe Rhine's basin and the islands of Lampedusa and Lampione are on the
iAfrican
icontinental shelf.
i
iAfter its quick industrial growth, Italy took a long time to confront its
ienvironmental problems. After several improvements, it now ranks 84th in the
iworld for ecological sustainability.[202] National parks cover about 5% of
ithe
icountry,[203] while the total area protected by national parks, regional
iparks
iand nature reserves covers about 10.5% of the Italian territory,[204] to
iwhich
imust be added 12% of coasts protected by marine protected areas.[205]
i
iIn the last decade, Italy has become one of the world's leading producers of
irenewable energy, ranking as the world's fourth largest holder of installed
isolar energy capacity[206][207] and the sixth largest holder of wind power
icapacity in 2010.[208] Renewable energies provided approximately 37% Italy's
ienergy consumption in 2020.[209] However, air pollution remains a severe
iproblem, especially in the industrialised north, reaching the tenth highest
ilevel worldwide of industrial carbon dioxide emissions in the 1990s.[210]
iItaly is the twelfth-largest carbon dioxide producer.[211][212]
i
iExtensive traffic and congestion in the largest metropolitan areas continue
ito cause severe environmental and health issues, even if smog levels have
idecreased dramatically since the 1970s and 1980s, and the presence of smog is
ibecoming an increasingly rarer phenomenon and levels of sulphur dioxide are
idecreasing.[213]
i
iMany watercourses and coastal stretches have also been contaminated by
iindustrial and agricultural activity, while because of rising water levels,
iVenice has been regularly flooded throughout recent years. Waste from
iindustrial activity is not always disposed of by legal means and has led to
ipermanent health effects on inhabitants of affected areas, as in the case of
ithe Seveso disaster. The country has also operated several nuclear reactors
ibetween 1963 and 1990 but, after the Chernobyl disaster and a referendum on
ithe issue the nuclear programme was terminated, a decision that was
ioverturned
iby the government in 2008, planning to build up to four nuclear power plants
iwith French technology. This was in turn struck down by a referendum
ifollowing
ithe Fukushima nuclear accident.[214]
i
iDeforestation, illegal building developments and poor land-management
ipolicies have led to significant erosion all over Italy's mountainous
iregions,
ileading to major ecological disasters like the 1963 Vajont Dam flood, the
i1998
iSarno[215] and 2009 Messina mudslides. The country had a 2019 Forest
iLandscape
iIntegrity Index mean score of 3.65/10, ranking it 142nd globally out of 172
icountries.[216]
i
iItaly has one the highest level of faunal biodiversity in Europe, with over
i57,000 species recorded, representing more than a third of all European
ifauna.[217] Italy's varied geological structure contributes to its high
iclimate and habitat diversity. The Italian peninsula is in the centre of the
iMediterranean Sea, forming a corridor between central Europe and North
iAfrica,
iand has 8,000 km (5,000 mi) of coastline. Italy also receives species from
ithe
iBalkans, Eurasia, and the Middle East. Italy's varied geological structure,
iincluding the Alps and the Apennines, Central Italian woodlands, and Southern
iItalian Garigue and Maquis shrubland, also contribute to high climate and
ihabitat diversity.
i
iThe fauna of Italy includes 4,777 endemic animal species,[218] which include
ithe Sardinian long-eared bat, Sardinian red deer, spectacled salamander,
ibrown
icave salamander, Italian newt, Italian frog, Apennine yellow-bellied toad,
iItalian wall lizard, Aeolian wall lizard, Sicilian wall lizard, Italian
iAesculapian snake, and Sicilian pond turtle. In Italy there are 119 mammals
ispecies,[219] 550 bird species,[220] 69 reptile species,[221] 39 amphibian
ispecies,[222] 623 fish species[223] and 56,213 invertebrate species, of which
i37,303 insect species.[224]
i
iThe flora of Italy was traditionally estimated to comprise about 5,500
ivascular plant species.[225] However, as of 2005[update], 6,759 species are
irecorded in the Data bank of Italian vascular flora.[226] Italy has 1,371
iendemic plant species and subspecies,[227] which include Sicilian Fir,
iBarbaricina columbine, Sea marigold, Lavender cotton and Ucriana violet.
iItaly
iis a signatory to the Berne Convention on the Conservation of European
iWildlife and Natural Habitats and the Habitats Directive both affording
iprotection to Italian fauna and flora.
i
iItaly has many botanical gardens and historic gardens, some of which are
iknown outside the country.[228][229] The Italian garden is stylistically
ibased
ion symmetry, axial geometry and on the principle of imposing order over
inature. It influenced the history of gardening, especially French gardens and
iEnglish gardens.[230] The Italian garden was influenced by Roman gardens and
iItalian Renaissance gardens.
i
iThe Italian wolf is the national animal of Italy,[231][232] while the
inational tree of the country is the strawberry tree.[233] The reasons for
ithis
ichoice are related to the fact that the Italian wolf, which inhabits the
iApennine Mountains and the Western Alps, features prominently in Latin and
iItalian cultures, such as in the legend of the founding of Rome,[234] while
ithe green leaves, white flowers and red berries of the strawberry tree, which
iis native to the Mediterranean region, recall the colours of the flag of
iItaly.[233]
i
iThe climate of Italy is influenced by the large body of water of the
iMediterranean Sea that surrounds Italy on every side except the north. These
iseas constitute a reservoir of heat and humidity for Italy. Within the
isouthern temperate zone, they determine a Mediterranean climate with local
idifferences due to the geomorphology of the territory, which tends to make
iits
imitigating effects felt, especially in high pressure conditions.[236]
i
iBecause of the length of the peninsula and the mostly mountainous hinterland,
ithe climate of Italy is highly diverse. In most of the inland northern and
icentral regions, the climate ranges from humid subtropical to humid
icontinental and oceanic. The climate of the Po valley geographical region is
imostly humid subtropical, with cool winters and hot summers.[237][238] The
icoastal areas of Liguria, Tuscany and most of the South generally fit the
iMediterranean climate stereotype (Köppen climate classification).
i
iConditions on the coast are different from those in the interior,
iparticularly during winter months when the higher altitudes tend to be cold,
iwet, and often snowy. The coastal regions have mild winters and hot and
igenerally dry summers; lowland valleys are hot in summer. Average winter
itemperatures vary from around 0 °C (32 °F) in the Alps to 12 °C (54 °F) in
iSicily, so average summer temperatures range from 20 °C (68 °F) to over 25 °C
i(77 °F).
i
iWinters can vary widely across the country with lingering cold, foggy and
isnowy periods in the north and milder, sunnier conditions in the south.
iSummers are hot across the country, except for at high altitude, particularly
iin the south. Northern and central areas can experience occasional strong
ithunderstorms from spring to autumn.[239]
i
i===== Politics =====
i
iItaly has been a unitary parliamentary republic since 2 June 1946, when the
imonarchy was abolished by a constitutional referendum. The President of Italy
i(Presidente della Repubblica), currently Sergio Mattarella since 2015, is
iItaly's head of state. The President is elected for a single seven years
imandate by the Parliament of Italy and some regional voters in joint session.
iItaly has a written democratic constitution, resulting from the work of a
iConstituent Assembly formed by the representatives of all the anti-fascist
iforces that contributed to the defeat of Nazi and Fascist forces during the
iItalian Civil War.[240]
i
iItaly has a parliamentary government based on a mixed proportional and
imajoritarian voting system. The parliament is perfectly bicameral: the two
ihouses, the Chamber of Deputies that meets in Palazzo Montecitorio, and the
iSenate of the Republic that meets in Palazzo Madama, have the same powers.
iThe
iPrime Minister, officially President of the Council of Ministers (Presidente
idel Consiglio dei Ministri), is Italy's head of government. The Prime
iMinister
iand the cabinet are appointed by the President of the Republic of Italy and
imust pass a vote of confidence in Parliament to come into office. To remain
ithe Prime Minister has to pass also eventual further votes of confidence or
ino
iconfidence in Parliament.
i
iThe prime minister is the President of the Council of Ministers – which holds
ieffective executive power – and must receive a vote of approval from it to
iexecute most political activities. The office is similar to those in most
iother parliamentary systems, but the head of the Italian government is not
iauthorised to request the dissolution of the Parliament of Italy.
i
iAnother difference with similar offices is that the overall political
iresponsibility for intelligence is vested in the President of the Council of
iMinisters. By virtue of that, the Prime Minister has exclusive power to
icoordinate intelligence policies, determine the financial resources and
istrengthen national cyber security; apply and protect State secrets;
iauthorise
iagents to carry out operations, in Italy or abroad, in violation of the
ilaw.[241]
i
iA peculiarity of the Italian Parliament is the representation given to
iItalian citizens permanently living abroad: 8 Deputies and 4 Senators elected
iin four distinct overseas constituencies. In addition, the Italian Senate is
icharacterised also by a small number of senators for life, appointed by the
iPresident "for outstanding patriotic merits in the social, scientific,
iartistic or literary field". Former Presidents of the Republic are ex officio
ilife senators.
i
iItaly's three major political parties are the Brothers of Italy, the
iDemocratic Party and the Five Star Movement. During the 2022 general
ielection,
ithese three parties and their coalitions won 357 out of 400 seats available
iin
ithe Chamber of Deputies and 187 out of 200 in the Senate. The centre-right
icoalition, which included Giorgia Meloni's Brothers of Italy, Matteo
iSalvini's
iLeague, Silvio Berlusconi's Forza Italia and Maurizio Lupi's Us Moderates,
iwon
ia majority of the seats in parliament. The rest of the seats were taken by
ithe
icentre-left coalition, which included Enrico Letta's Democratic Party, Angelo
iBonelli's Greens and Left Alliance, Aosta Valley, Emma Bonino's More Europe &
iLuigi Di Maio's Civic Commitment, as well as by Giuseppe Conte's Five Star
iMovement, Carlo Calenda's Action - Italia Viva, Philipp Achammer and Stefan
iPremstaller's South Tyrolean People's Party, Cateno De Luca's South Calls
iNorth and Ricardo Antonio Merlo's Associative Movement of Italians Abroad.
i
iThe law of Italy has a plurality of sources of production. These are arranged
iin a hierarchical scale, under which the rule of a lower source cannot
iconflict with the rule of an upper source (hierarchy of sources).[242] The
iConstitution of 1948 is the main source.[243] The judiciary of Italy is based
ion Roman law modified by the Napoleonic code and later statutes. The Supreme
iCourt of Cassation is the highest court in Italy for both criminal and civil
iappeal cases. The Constitutional Court of Italy (Corte Costituzionale) rules
ion the conformity of laws with the constitution and is a post–World War II
iinnovation.
i
iSince their appearance in the middle of the 19th century, Italian organised
icrime and criminal organisations have infiltrated the social and economic
ilife
iof many regions in Southern Italy, the most notorious of which being the
iSicilian Mafia, which would later expand into some foreign countries
iincluding
ithe United States. Mafia receipts may reach 9%[244][245] of Italy's GDP.[246]
i
iA 2009 report identified 610 comuni which have a strong Mafia presence, where
i13 million Italians live and 14.6% of the Italian GDP is produced.[247][248]
iThe Calabrian 'Ndrangheta, nowadays probably the most powerful crime
isyndicate
iof Italy, accounts alone for 3% of the country's GDP.[249] However, at 0.013
iper 1,000 people, Italy has only the 47th highest murder rate[250] compared
ito
i61 countries and the 43rd highest number of rapes per 1,000 people compared
ito
i64 countries in the world. These are relatively low figures among developed
icountries.
i
iThe Italian law enforcement system is complex, with multiple police
iforces.[251] The national policing agencies are the Polizia di Stato (State
iPolice), the Arma dei Carabinieri, the Guardia di Finanza (Financial Guard),
iand the Polizia Penitenziaria (Prison Police),[252] as well as the Guardia
iCostiera (coast guard police).[251] Although policing in Italy is primarily
iprovided on a national basis,[252] there also exists Polizia Provinciale
i(provincial police) and Polizia Municipale (municipal police).[251]
i
iItaly is a founding member of the European Economic Community (EEC), now the
iEuropean Union (EU), and of NATO. Italy was admitted to the United Nations in
i1955, and it is a member and a strong supporter of a wide number of
iinternational organisations, such as the Organisation for Economic
iCo-operation and Development (OECD), the General Agreement on Tariffs and
iTrade/World Trade Organization (GATT/WTO), the Organization for Security and
iCo-operation in Europe (OSCE), the Council of Europe, and the Central
iEuropean
iInitiative. Its recent or upcoming turns in the rotating presidency of
iinternational organisations include the Organization for Security and
iCo-operation in Europe in 2018, the G7 in 2017 and the EU Council from July
ito
iDecember 2014. Italy is also a recurrent non-permanent member of the UN
iSecurity Council, the most recently in 2017.
i
iItaly strongly supports multilateral international politics, endorsing the
iUnited Nations and its international security activities. In 2013, Italy had
i5,296 troops deployed abroad, engaged in 33 UN and NATO missions in 25
icountries of the world.[253] Italy deployed troops in support of UN
ipeacekeeping missions in Somalia, Mozambique, and East Timor and provides
isupport for NATO and UN operations in Bosnia, Kosovo and Albania. Italy
ideployed over 2,000 troops in Afghanistan in support of Operation Enduring
iFreedom (OEF) from February 2003.
i
iItaly supported international efforts to reconstruct and stabilise Iraq, but
iit had withdrawn its military contingent of some 3,200 troops by 2006,
imaintaining only humanitarian operators and other civilian personnel. In
iAugust 2006 Italy deployed about 2,450 troops in Lebanon for the United
iNations' peacekeeping mission UNIFIL.[254] Italy is one of the largest
ifinanciers of the Palestinian National Authority, contributing €60 million in
i2013 alone.[255]
i
iThe Italian Army, Navy, Air Force and Carabinieri collectively form the
iItalian Armed Forces, under the command of the High Council of Defence,
ipresided over by the President of Italy, as established by article 87 of the
iConstitution of Italy. According to article 78, the Parliament has the
iauthority to declare a state of war and vest the necessary powers in the
iGovernment.
i
iDespite not being a branch of the armed forces, the Guardia di Finanza
i("Financial Guard") has military status and is organized along military
ilines.[note 3] Since 2005, military service is voluntary.[256] In 2010, the
iItalian military had 293,202 personnel on active duty,[257] of which 114,778
iare Carabinieri.[258] As part of NATO's nuclear sharing strategy Italy also
ihosts 90 United States B61 nuclear bombs, located in the Ghedi and Aviano air
ibases.[259]
i
iThe Italian Army is the national ground defence force. Its best-known combat
ivehicles are the Dardo infantry fighting vehicle, the Centauro tank destroyer
iand the Ariete tank, and among its aircraft the Mangusta attack helicopter,
iin
ithe last years deployed in EU, NATO and UN missions. It also has at its
idisposal many Leopard 1 and M113 armoured vehicles. It was formed in 1946
ifrom
iwhat remained of the Regio Esercito ("Royal Army", which was established on
ithe occasion of the proclamation of the Kingdom of Italy, 1861) after World
iWar II, when Italy became a republic following a referendum.
i
iThe Italian Navy is a blue-water navy. In modern times the Italian Navy,
ibeing a member of the EU and NATO, has taken part in many coalition
ipeacekeeping operations around the world. It was formed in 1946 from what
iremained of the Regia Marina ("Royal Navy", which was established on the
ioccasion of the proclamation of the Kingdom of Italy, 1861) after World War
iII, when Italy became a republic following a referendum. The Italian Navy in
i2014 operates 154 vessels in service, including minor auxiliary vessels.[260]
i
iThe Italian Air Force in 2021 operates 219 combat jets. A transport
icapability is guaranteed by a fleet of 27 C-130Js and C-27J Spartan. The
iItalian Air Force was founded as an independent service arm on 28 March 1923
iby King Victor Emmanuel III as the Regia Aeronautica ("Royal Air Force").
iAfter World War II, when Italy became a republic following a referendum, the
iRegia Aeronautica was given its current name. The acrobatic display team is
ithe Frecce Tricolori ("Tricolour Arrows").
i
iAn autonomous corps of the military, the Carabinieri are the gendarmerie and
imilitary police of Italy, policing the military and civilian population
ialongside Italy's other police forces. While the different branches of the
iCarabinieri report to separate ministries for each of their individual
ifunctions, the corps reports to the Ministry of Internal Affairs when
imaintaining public order and security.[261]
i
iItaly is constituted by 20 regions (regioni)—five of these regions having a
ispecial autonomous status that enables them to enact legislation on
iadditional
imatters, 107 provinces (province) or metropolitan cities (città
imetropolitane), and 7,904 municipalities (comuni).[262] This is a list of
iregions in Italy:
i
i===== Economy =====
i
iItaly has a major advanced[263] capitalist mixed economy, ranking as the
ithird-largest in the Eurozone and the eighth-largest in the world.[264] A
ifounding member of the G7, the Eurozone and the OECD, it is regarded as one
iof
ithe world's most industrialised nations and a leading country in world trade
iand exports.[265][266][267] It is a highly developed country; ranked the 30th
iHuman Development Index. It also performs well in life expectancy, healthcare
iand [268] education. The country is well known for its creative and
iinnovative
ibusiness,[269] a large and competitive agricultural sector[270] (with the
iworld's largest wine production),[271] and for its influential and
ihigh-quality automobile, machinery, food, design and fashion
iindustry.[272][273][274]
i
iItaly is the world's sixth-largest manufacturing country,[275] characterised
iby a smaller number of global multinational corporations than other economies
iof comparable size and many dynamic small and medium-sized enterprises,
inotoriously clustered in several industrial districts, which are the backbone
iof the Italian industry. This has produced a manufacturing sector often
ifocused on the export of niche market and luxury products, that if on one
iside
iis less capable to compete on the quantity, on the other side is more capable
iof facing the competition from China and other emerging Asian economies based
ion lower labour costs, with higher quality products.[276] Italy was the
iworld's tenth-largest exporter in 2019. Its closest trade ties are with the
iother countries of the European Union. Its largest export partners in 2019
iwere Germany (12%), France (11%), and the United States (10%).[277]
i
iThe automotive industry is a significant part of the Italian manufacturing
isector, with over 144,000 firms and almost 485,000 employed people in
i2015,[279] and a contribution of 8.5% to Italian GDP.[280] Stellantis is
icurrently the world's fifth-largest auto maker.[281] The country boasts a
iwide
irange of acclaimed products, from compact city cars to luxury supercars such
ias Maserati, Pagani, Lamborghini, and Ferrari.[282]
i
iThe Banca Monte dei Paschi di Siena is the world's oldest or second oldest
ibank in continuous operation, depending on the definition, and the
ifourth-largest Italian commercial and retail bank.[283] Italy has a strong
icooperative sector, with the largest share of the population (4.5%) employed
iby a cooperative in the EU.[284] The Val d'Agri area, Basilicata, hosts the
ilargest onshore hydrocarbon field in Europe.[285] Moderate natural gas
ireserves, mainly in the Po Valley and offshore Adriatic Sea, have been
idiscovered in recent years and constitute the country's most important
imineral
iresource. Italy is one of the world's leading producers of pumice, pozzolana,
iand feldspar.[286] Another notable mineral resource is marble, especially the
iworld-famous white Carrara marble from the Massa and Carrara quarries in
iTuscany.
i
iItaly is part of a monetary union, the Eurozone, and of the European single
imarket, which represents more than 500 million consumers. Several domestic
icommercial policies are determined by agreements among European Union (EU)
imembers and by EU legislation. Italy introduced the common European currency,
ithe Euro in 2002.[287][288] It is a member of the Eurozone which represents
iaround 330 million citizens. Its monetary policy is set by the European
iCentral Bank.
i
iItaly was hit hard by the Financial crisis of 2007–08, that exacerbated the
icountry's structural problems.[289] Effectively, after a strong GDP growth of
i5–6% per year from the 1950s to the early 1970s,[290] and a progressive
islowdown in the 1980–90s, the country virtually stagnated in the
i2000s.[291][292] The political efforts to revive growth with massive
igovernment spending eventually produced a severe rise in public debt, that
istood at over 131.8% of GDP in 2017,[293] ranking second in the EU only after
ithe Greek one.[294] For all that, the largest chunk of Italian public debt is
iowned by national subjects, a major difference between Italy and Greece,[295]
iand the level of household debt is much lower than the OECD average.[296]
i
iA gaping North–South divide is a major factor of socio-economic
iweakness.[297] It can be noted by the huge difference in statistical income
ibetween the northern and southern regions and municipalities.[298] The
irichest
iprovince, Alto Adige-South Tyrol, earns 152% of the national GDP per capita,
iwhile the poorest region, Calabria, 61%.[299] The unemployment rate (11.1%)
istands slightly above the Eurozone average,[300] but the disaggregated figure
iis 6.6% in the North and 19.2% in the South.[301] The youth unemployment rate
i(31.7% in March 2018) is extremely high compared to EU standards.[302]
i
iAccording to the last national agricultural census, there were 1.6 million
ifarms in 2010 (−32.4% since 2000) covering 12,700,000 ha or 31,382,383 acres
i(63% of which are located in Southern Italy).[305] The vast majority (99%)
iare
ifamily-operated and small, averaging only 8 ha (20 acres) in size.[305] Of
ithe
itotal surface area in agricultural use (forestry excluded), grain fields take
iup 31%, olive tree orchards 8.2%, vineyards 5.4%, citrus orchards 3.8%, sugar
ibeets 1.7%, and horticulture 2.4%. The remainder is primarily dedicated to
ipastures (25.9%) and feed grains (11.6%).[305]
i
iItaly is the world's largest wine producer,[306] and one of the leading in
iolive oil, fruits (apples, olives, grapes, oranges, lemons, pears, apricots,
ihazelnuts, peaches, cherries, plums, strawberries and kiwifruits), and
ivegetables (especially artichokes and tomatoes). The most famous Italian
iwines
iare probably the Tuscan Chianti and the Piedmontese Barolo. Other famous
iwines
iare Barbaresco, Barbera d'Asti, Brunello di Montalcino, Frascati,
iMontepulciano d'Abruzzo, Morellino di Scansano, and the sparkling wines
iFranciacorta and Prosecco.
i
iQuality goods in which Italy specialises, particularly the already mentioned
iwines and regional cheeses, are often protected under the quality assurance
ilabels DOC/DOP. This geographical indication certificate, which is attributed
iby the European Union, is considered important in order to avoid confusion
iwith low-quality mass-produced ersatz products.
i
iItaly was the first country in the world to build motorways, the so-called
iautostrade, reserved for fast traffic and for motor vehicles only.[308]
iRegarding the national road network, in 2002 there were 668,721 km (415,524
imi) of serviceable roads in Italy, including 6,487 km (4,031 mi) of
imotorways,
istate-owned but privately operated by Atlantia. In 2005, about 34,667,000
ipassenger cars (590 cars per 1,000 people) and 4,015,000 goods vehicles
icirculated on the national road network.[309]
i
iThe national railway network, state-owned and operated by Rete Ferroviaria
iItaliana (FSI), in 2008 totalled 16,529 km (10,271 mi) of which 11,727 km
i(7,287 mi) is electrified, and on which 4,802 locomotives and railcars run.
iThe main public operator of high-speed trains is Trenitalia, part of FSI.
iHigher-speed trains are divided into three categories: Frecciarossa (English:
ired arrow) trains operate at a maximum speed of 300 km/h on dedicated
ihigh-speed tracks; Frecciargento (English: silver arrow) trains operate at a
imaximum speed of 250 km/h on both high-speed and mainline tracks; and
iFrecciabianca (English: white arrow) trains operate on high-speed regional
ilines at a maximum speed of 200 km/h. Italy has 11 rail border crossings over
ithe Alpine mountains with its neighbouring countries.
i
iItaly is the fifth in Europe by the number of passengers by air transport,
iwith about 148 million passengers or about 10% of the European total in
i2011.[310] In 2022 there were 45 civil airports in Italy, including the two
ihubs of Malpensa International Airport in Milan and Leonardo da Vinci
iInternational Airport in Rome.[311] Since October 2021, Italy's flag carrier
iairline is ITA Airways, which took over the brand, the IATA ticketing code,
iand many assets belonging to the former flag carrier Alitalia, after its
ibankruptcy.[312][313]
i
iIn 2004 there were 43 major seaports, including the seaport of Genoa, the
icountry's largest and second-largest in the Mediterranean Sea. In 2005 Italy
imaintained a civilian air fleet of about 389,000 units and a merchant fleet
iof
i581 ships.[309] The national inland waterways network has a length of 2,400
ikm
i(1,491 mi) for commercial traffic in 2012.[277]
i
iItaly has been the final destination of the Silk Road for many centuries. In
iparticular, the construction of the Suez Canal intensified sea trade with
iEast
iAfrica and Asia from the 19th century. Since the end of the Cold War and
iincreasing European integration, the trade relations, which were often
iinterrupted in the 20th century, have intensified again and the northern
iItalian ports such as the deep-water port of Trieste in the northernmost part
iof the Mediterranean with its extensive rail connections to Central and
iEastern Europe are once again the destination of government subsidies and
isignificant foreign investment.[314][315][316][317][318][319]
i
iIn the last decade, Italy has become one of the world's largest producers of
irenewable energy, ranking as the second largest producer in the European
iUnion
iand the ninth in the world. Wind power, hydroelectricity, and geothermal
ipower
iare also significant sources of electricity in the country. Renewable sources
iaccount for 27.5% of all electricity produced in Italy, with hydro alone
ireaching 12.6%, followed by solar at 5.7%, wind at 4.1%, bioenergy at 3.5%,
iand geothermal at 1.6%.[321] The rest of the national demand is covered by
ifossil fuels (38.2% natural gas, 13% coal, 8.4% oil) and by imports.[321]
iEni,
iwith operations in 79 countries, is considered one of the seven "Supermajor"
ioil companies in the world, and one of the world's largest industrial
icompanies.[322]
i
iSolar energy production alone accounted for almost 9% of the total electric
iproduction in the country in 2014, making Italy the country with the highest
icontribution from solar energy in the world.[320] The Montalto di Castro
iPhotovoltaic Power Station, completed in 2010, is the largest photovoltaic
ipower station in Italy with 85 MW. Other examples of large PV plants in Italy
iare San Bellino (70.6 MW), Cellino san Marco (42.7 MW) and Sant' Alberto
i(34.6
iMW).[323] Italy was the first country in the world to exploit geothermal
ienergy to produce electricity.[324] Italy had managed four nuclear reactors
iuntil the 1980s. However, nuclear power in Italy has been abandoned following
ia 1987 referendum (in the wake of the 1986 Chernobyl disaster in Soviet
iUkraine), though Italy still imports nuclear energy from Italy-owned reactors
iin foreign territories.
i
iThrough the centuries, Italy has fostered the scientific community that
iproduced many major discoveries in physics and other sciences. During the
iRenaissance Italian polymaths such as Leonardo da Vinci (1452–1519),
iMichelangelo (1475–1564) and Leon Battista Alberti (1404–1472) made
icontributions in a variety of fields, including biology, architecture, and
iengineering. Galileo Galilei (1564–1642), an astronomer, physicist, engineer,
iand polymath, played a major role in the Scientific Revolution. He is
iconsidered the "father" of observational astronomy,[325] modern
iphysics,[326][327] the scientific method,[328] and modern science.[329]
i
iOther astronomers such as Giovanni Domenico Cassini (1625–1712) and Giovanni
iSchiaparelli (1835–1910) made discoveries about the Solar System. In
imathematics, Joseph Louis Lagrange (born Giuseppe Lodovico Lagrangia,
i1736–1813) was active before leaving Italy. Fibonacci (c. 1170 – c. 1250),
iand
iGerolamo Cardano (1501–1576) made fundamental advances in mathematics.[332]
iLuca Pacioli established accounting to the world. Physicist Enrico Fermi
i(1901–1954), a Nobel prize laureate, led the team in Chicago that developed
ithe first nuclear reactor. He is considered the "architect of the nuclear
iage"[330] and the "architect of the atomic bomb".[331] He, Emilio G. Segrè
i(1905–1989) who discovered the elements technetium and astatine, and the
iantiproton), Bruno Rossi (1905–1993) a pioneer in Cosmic Rays and X-ray
iastronomy) and a number of Italian physicists were forced to leave Italy in
ithe 1930s by Fascist laws against Jews.[333]
i
iOther prominent physicists include: Amedeo Avogadro (most noted for his
icontributions to molecular theory, in particular, the Avogadro's law and the
iAvogadro constant), Evangelista Torricelli (inventor of barometer),
iAlessandro
iVolta (inventor of electric battery), Guglielmo Marconi (inventor of radio),
iGalileo Ferraris and Antonio Pacinotti, pioneers of the induction motor,
iAlessandro Cruto, pioneer of light bulb and Innocenzo Manzetti, eclectic
ipioneer of auto and robotics, Ettore Majorana (who discovered the Majorana
ifermions), Carlo Rubbia (1984 Nobel Prize in Physics for work leading to the
idiscovery of the W and Z particles at CERN). Antonio Meucci is known for
ideveloping a voice-communication device which is often credited as the first
itelephone.[334][335] Pier Giorgio Perotto in 1964 designed one of the first
idesktop programmable calculators, the Programma 101.[336][337][338]
i
iIn biology, Francesco Redi has been the first to challenge the theory of
ispontaneous generation by demonstrating that maggots come from eggs of flies
iand he described 180 parasites in detail and Marcello Malpighi founded
imicroscopic anatomy, Lazzaro Spallanzani conducted research in bodily
ifunctions, animal reproduction, and cellular theory, Camillo Golgi, whose
imany
iachievements include the discovery of the Golgi complex, paved the way to the
iacceptance of the Neuron doctrine, Rita Levi-Montalcini discovered the nerve
igrowth factor (awarded 1986 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine). In
ichemistry, Giulio Natta received the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1963 for his
iwork on high polymers. Giuseppe Occhialini received the Wolf Prize in Physics
ifor the discovery of the pion or pi-meson decay in 1947. Ennio de Giorgi, a
iWolf Prize in Mathematics recipient in 1990, solved Bernstein's problem about
iminimal surfaces and the 19th Hilbert problem on the regularity of solutions
iof Elliptic partial differential equations.[339]
i
iLaboratori Nazionali del Gran Sasso (LNGS) is the largest underground
iresearch centre in the world.[340] ELETTRA, Eurac Research, ESA Centre for
iEarth Observation, Institute for Scientific Interchange, International Centre
ifor Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Centre for Maritime Research and
iExperimentation and the International Centre for Theoretical Physics conduct
ibasic research. Trieste has the highest percentage of researchers in Europe
iin
irelation to the population.[341] Italy was ranked 28th in the Global
iInnovation Index in 2022.[342] There are numerous technology parks in Italy
isuch as the Science and Technology Parks Kilometro Rosso (Bergamo), the AREA
iScience Park (Trieste), The VEGA-Venice Gateway for Science and Technology
i(Venezia), the Toscana Life Sciences (Siena), the Technology Park of Lodi
iCluster (Lodi), and the Technology Park of Navacchio (Pisa),[343] as well as
iscience museums such as the Museo Nazionale Scienza e Tecnologia Leonardo da
iVinci in Milan, the Città della Scienza in Naples and the Institute and
iMuseum
iof the History of Science in Florence.
i
iWithin this great Italian History of Science and Technology, modern times
itell a different and more technologically divergent story. The North–South
idivide is a significant factor that leads to a vast difference in income
ibetween the Northern and Southern regions, which brings up the topic of the
iDigital Divide in Italy. The long history of this divided peninsula, now a
iunified nation-state, details the complex problems of underdeveloped areas in
ithe South.[344] As expected, these problems of underdevelopment and poverty
istill linger today, also reflected in the concept of the digital divide
ibetween the North and South. The Global digital divide is broadly described
ias
ithe technological differences between underdeveloped and developed countries.
iWhile this does not necessarily mean that people have no access to
itechnology,
iit is made clear that this equates to differences in technology, such as the
iInternet and household electronics.[345] Digital inequalities between
iNorthern
iand Southern Italy exist and are still prevalent, especially when related to
ieducation.
i
iPeople have visited Italy for centuries, yet the first to visit the peninsula
ifor touristic reasons were aristocrats during the Grand Tour, beginning in
ithe
i17th century, and flourishing in the 18th and the 19th century.[348] This was
ia period in which European aristocrats, many of whom were British, visited
iparts of Europe, with Italy as a key destination.[348] For Italy, this was in
iorder to study ancient architecture, local culture and to admire the natural
ibeauties.[349]
i
iNowadays Italy is the fifth most visited country in international tourism,
iwith a total of 52.3 million international arrivals in 2016.[350] The total
icontribution of travel & tourism to GDP (including wider effects from
iinvestment, the supply chain and induced income impacts) was EUR162.7bn in
i2014 (10.1% of GDP) and generated 1,082,000 jobs directly in 2014 (4.8% of
itotal employment).[351]
i
iFactors of tourist interest in Italy are mainly culture, cuisine, history,
ifashion, architecture, art, religious sites and routes, wedding tourism,
inaturalistic beauties, nightlife, underwater sites and
ispas.[352][353][354][355][356][357][358] Winter and summer tourism are
ipresent
iin many locations in the Alps and the Apennines,[359] while seaside tourism
iis
iwidespread in coastal locations on the Mediterranean Sea.[360] Italy is the
ileading cruise tourism destination in the Mediterranean Sea.[361]
i
iThe most visited regions of Italy, measured by nights spent in tourist
iaccommodation establishments, are Veneto, Tuscany, Lombardy, Emilia-Romagna
iand Lazio.[362] Rome is the 3rd most visited city in Europe and the 12th in
ithe world, with 9.4 million arrivals in 2017 while Milan is the 27th
iworldwide
iwith 6.8 million tourists.[363] In addition, Venice and Florence are also
iamong the world's top 100 destinations.
i
iItaly is also the country with the highest number of UNESCO World Heritage
iSites in the world (58).[364] Out of Italy's 58 heritage sites, 53 are
icultural and 5 are natural.[365] In Italy there is a broad variety of hotels,
igoing from 1–5 stars. According to ISTAT, in 2017, there were 32,988 hotels
iwith 1,133,452 rooms and 2,239,446 beds.[366] As for non-hotel facilities
i(campsites, tourist villages, accommodations for rent, agritourism, etc.), in
i2017 their number was 171,915 with 2,798,352 beds.[366]
i
i===== Demographics =====
i
iAt the beginning of 2020, Italy had 60,317,116 inhabitants.[367] The
iresulting population density, at 202 inhabitants per square kilometre (520/sq
imi), is higher than that of most Western European countries. However, the
idistribution of the population is widely uneven. The most densely populated
iareas are the Po Valley (that accounts for almost a half of the national
ipopulation) and the metropolitan areas of Rome and Naples, while vast regions
isuch as the Alps and Apennines highlands, the plateaus of Basilicata and the
iisland of Sardinia, as well as much of Sicily, are sparsely populated.
i
iThe population of Italy almost doubled during the 20th century, but the
ipattern of growth was extremely uneven because of large-scale internal
imigration from the rural South to the industrial cities of the North, a
iphenomenon which happened as a consequence of the Italian economic miracle of
ithe 1950–1960s. High fertility and birth rates persisted until the 1970s,
iafter which they started to decline. The population rapidly aged; by 2010,
ione
iin five Italians was over 65 years old, and the country currently has the
ififth oldest population in the world, with a median age of 46.5
iyears.[277][368] However, in recent years Italy has experienced significant
igrowth in birth rates.[369] The total fertility rate has also climbed from an
iall-time low of 1.18 children per woman in 1995 to 1.41 in 2008,[370] albeit
istill below the replacement rate of 2.1 and considerably below the high of
i5.06 children born per woman in 1883.[371] Nevertheless, the total fertility
irate is expected to reach 1.6–1.8 in 2030.[372]
i
iFrom the late 19th century until the 1960s Italy was a country of mass
iemigration. Between 1898 and 1914, the peak years of Italian diaspora,
iapproximately 750,000 Italians emigrated each year.[373] The diaspora
iconcerned more than 25 million Italians and it is considered the biggest mass
imigration of contemporary times.[374] As a result, today more than 4.1
imillion
iItalian citizens are living abroad,[375] while at least 60 million people of
ifull or part Italian ancestry live outside of Italy, most notably in
iArgentina,[376] Brazil,[377] Uruguay,[378] Venezuela,[379] the United
iStates,[380] Canada,[381] Australia[382] and France.[383]
i
iIn 2016, Italy had about 5.05 million foreign residents,[384] making up 8.3%
iof the total population. The figures include more than half a million
ichildren
iborn in Italy to foreign nationals (second generation immigrants) but exclude
iforeign nationals who have subsequently acquired Italian citizenship;[385] in
i2016, about 201,000 people became Italian citizens.[386] The official figures
ialso exclude illegal immigrants, who estimated to number at least 670,000 as
iof 2008.[387]
i
iStarting from the early 1980s, until then a linguistically and culturally
ihomogeneous society, Italy begun to attract substantial flows of foreign
iimmigrants.[388] After the fall of the Berlin Wall and, more recently, the
i2004 and 2007 enlargements of the European Union, large waves of migration
ioriginated from the former socialist countries of Eastern Europe (especially
iRomania, Albania, Ukraine and Poland). Another source of immigration is
ineighbouring North Africa (in particular, Morocco, Egypt and Tunisia), with
isoaring arrivals as a consequence of the Arab Spring. Furthermore, in recent
iyears, growing migration fluxes from Asia-Pacific (notably China[389] and the
iPhilippines) and Latin America have been recorded.
i
iCurrently, about one million Romanian citizens (around 10% of them being
iethnic Romani people[390]) are officially registered as living in Italy,
irepresenting the largest migrant population, followed by Albanians and
iMoroccans with about 500,000 people each. The number of unregistered
iRomanians
iis difficult to estimate, but the Balkan Investigative Reporting Network
isuggested in 2007 that there might have been half a million or
imore.[391][note
i4]
i
iAs of 2010, the foreign born population of Italy was from the following
iregions: Europe (54%), Africa (22%), Asia (16%), the Americas (8%) and
iOceania
i(0.06%). The distribution of foreign population is geographically varied in
iItaly: in 2020, 61.2% of foreign citizens lived in Northern Italy (in
iparticular 36.1% in the North West and 25.1% in the North East), 24.2% in the
icentre, 10.8% in the South and 3.9% in the Islands.[393]
i
iItaly's official language is Italian, as stated by the framework law no.
i482/1999[394] and Trentino Alto-Adige's special Statute,[395] which is
iadopted
iwith a constitutional law. Around the world there are an estimated 64 million
inative Italian speakers[396][397][398] and another 21 million who use it as a
isecond language.[399] Italian is often natively spoken in a regional variety,
inot to be confused with Italy's regional and minority languages;[400][401]
ihowever, the establishment of a national education system led to a decrease
iin
ivariation in the languages spoken across the country during the 20th century.
iStandardisation was further expanded in the 1950s and 1960s due to economic
igrowth and the rise of mass media and television (the state broadcaster RAI
ihelped set a standard Italian).
i
iTwelve "historical minority languages" (minoranze linguistiche storiche) are
iformally recognised: Albanian, Catalan, German, Greek, Slovene, Croatian,
iFrench, Franco-Provençal, Friulian, Ladin, Occitan and Sardinian.[394] Four
iof
ithese also enjoy a co-official status in their respective region: French in
ithe Aosta Valley;[402] German in South Tyrol, and Ladin as well in some parts
iof the same province and in parts of the neighbouring Trentino;[403] and
iSlovene in the provinces of Trieste, Gorizia and Udine.[404] A number of
iother
iEthnologue, ISO and UNESCO languages are not recognised by Italian law. Like
iFrance, Italy has signed the European Charter for Regional or Minority
iLanguages, but has not ratified it.[405]
i
iBecause of recent immigration, Italy has sizeable populations whose native
ilanguage is not Italian, nor a regional language. According to the Italian
iNational Institute of Statistics, Romanian is the most common mother tongue
iamong foreign residents in Italy: almost 800,000 people speak Romanian as
itheir first language (21.9% of the foreign residents aged 6 and over). Other
iprevalent mother tongues are Arabic (spoken by over 475,000 people; 13.1% of
iforeign residents), Albanian (380,000 people) and Spanish (255,000
ipeople).[406]
i
iIn 2017, the proportion of Italians who identified themselves as Roman
iCatholic Christians was 74.4%.[407] Since 1985, Catholicism is no longer
iofficially the state religion.[408] Italy has the world's fifth-largest
iCatholic population, and is the largest Catholic nation in Europe.[409]
i
iThe Holy See, the episcopal jurisdiction of Rome, contains the central
igovernment of the Catholic Church. It is recognised by other subjects of
iinternational law as a sovereign entity, headed by the Pope, who is also the
iBishop of Rome, with which diplomatic relations can be maintained.[410][note
i5] Often incorrectly referred to as "the Vatican", the Holy See is not the
isame entity as the Vatican City State because the Holy See is the
ijurisdiction
iand administrative entity of the Pope.[411] The Vatican City came into
iexistence only in 1929.
i
iIn 2011, minority Christian faiths in Italy included an estimated 1.5 million
iOrthodox Christians, or 2.5% of the population;[412] 500,000 Pentecostals and
iEvangelicals (of whom 400,000 are members of the Assemblies of God), 251,192
iJehovah's Witnesses,[413] 30,000 Waldensians,[414] 25,000 Seventh-day
iAdventists, 26,925 Latter-day Saints, 15,000 Baptists (plus some 5,000 Free
iBaptists), 7,000 Lutherans, 4,000 Methodists (affiliated with the Waldensian
iChurch).[415]
i
iOne of the longest-established minority religious faiths in Italy is Judaism,
iJews having been present in Ancient Rome since before the birth of Christ.
iItaly has for centuries welcomed Jews expelled from other countries, notably
iSpain. However, about 20% of Italian Jews were killed during the
iHolocaust.[416] This, together with the emigration which preceded and
ifollowed
iWorld War II, has left only around 28,400 Jews in Italy.[417]
i
iSoaring immigration in the last two decades has been accompanied by an
iincrease in non-Christian faiths. Following immigration from the Indian
isubcontinent, in Italy there are 120,000 Hindus,[418] 70,000 Sikhs and 22
igurdwaras across the country.[419]
i
iThe Italian state, as a measure to protect religious freedom, devolves shares
iof income tax to recognised religious communities, under a regime known as
iEight per thousand. Donations are allowed to Christian, Jewish, Buddhist and
iHindu communities; however, Islam remains excluded, since no Muslim
icommunities have yet signed a concordat with the Italian state.[420]
iTaxpayers
iwho do not wish to fund a religion contribute their share to the state
iwelfare
isystem.[421]
i
iEducation in Italy is free and mandatory from ages six to sixteen,[422] and
iconsists of five stages: kindergarten (scuola dell'infanzia), primary school
i(scuola primaria), lower secondary school (scuola secondaria di primo grado),
iupper secondary school (scuola secondaria di secondo grado) and university
i(università).[423]
i
iPrimary education lasts eight years. Students are given a basic education in
iItalian, English, mathematics, natural sciences, history, geography, social
istudies, physical education and visual and musical arts. Secondary education
ilasts for five years and includes three traditional types of schools focused
ion different academic levels: the liceo prepares students for university
istudies with a classical or scientific curriculum, while the istituto tecnico
iand the Istituto professionale prepare pupils for vocational education.
i
iIn 2018, the Italian secondary education was evaluated as below the OECD
iaverage.[424] Italy scored below the OECD average in reading and science, and
inear OECD average in mathematics. Mean performance in Italy declined in
ireading and science, and remained stable in mathematics.[424] Trento and
iBolzano scored at an above the national average in reading.[424] Compared to
ischool children in other OECD countries, children in Italy missed out on a
igreater amount of learning due to absences and indiscipline in
iclassrooms.[425] A wide gap exists between northern schools, which perform
inear average, and schools in the South, that had much poorer results.[426]
i
iTertiary education in Italy is divided between public universities, private
iuniversities and the prestigious and selective superior graduate schools,
isuch
ias the Scuola Normale Superiore di Pisa. 33 Italian universities were ranked
iamong the world's top 500 in 2019, the third-largest number in Europe after
ithe United Kingdom and Germany.[427] Bologna University, founded in 1088, is
ithe oldest university in continuous operation,[428] as well as one of the
ileading academic institutions in Italy and Europe.[429] The Bocconi
iUniversity, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, LUISS, Polytechnic
iUniversity of Turin, Polytechnic University of Milan, Sapienza University of
iRome, and University of Milan are also ranked among the best in the
iworld.[430]
i
iLife expectancy in the country is 80 for males and 85 for females, placing
ithe country 5th in the world for life expectancy.[432] In comparison to other
iWestern countries, Italy has a relatively low rate of adult obesity (below
i10%[433]), as there are several health benefits of the Mediterranean
idiet.[434] The proportion of daily smokers was 22% in 2012, down from 24.4%
iin
i2000 but still slightly above the OECD average.[435] Smoking in public places
iincluding bars, restaurants, night clubs and offices has been restricted to
ispecially ventilated rooms since 2005.[436] In 2013, UNESCO added the
iMediterranean diet to the Representative List of the Intangible Cultural
iHeritage of Humanity of Italy (promoter), Morocco, Spain, Portugal, Greece,
iCyprus and Croatia.[437][438]
i
iThe Italian state runs a universal public healthcare system since 1978.[439]
iHowever, healthcare is provided to all citizens and residents by a mixed
ipublic-private system. The public part is the Servizio Sanitario Nazionale,
iwhich is organised under the Ministry of Health and administered on a
idevolved
iregional basis. Healthcare spending accounted for 9.7% of GDP in 2020.[440]
iItaly's healthcare system is consistently ranked among the best in the
iworld.[441][442] In 2018 Italy's healthcare is ranked 20th in Europe in the
iEuro Health Consumer Index.
i
i===== Culture =====
i
iItaly is considered one of the birthplaces of western civilization and a
icultural superpower.[443] Divided by politics and geography for centuries
iuntil its eventual unification in 1861, Italy's culture has been shaped by a
imultitude of regional customs and local centres of power and patronage.[444]
iItaly has had a central role in Western culture for centuries and is still
irecognised for its cultural traditions and artists. During the Middle Ages
iand
ithe Renaissance, a number of courts competed to attract architects, artists
iand scholars, thus producing a legacy of monuments, paintings, music and
iliterature. Despite the political and social isolation of these courts, Italy
ihas made a substantial contribution to the cultural and historical heritage
iof
iEurope.[445]
i
iItaly has rich collections of art, culture and literature from many periods.
iThe country has had a broad cultural influence worldwide, also because
inumerous Italians emigrated to other places during the Italian diaspora.
iFurthermore, Italy has, overall, an estimated 100,000 monuments of any sort
i(museums, palaces, buildings, statues, churches, art galleries, villas,
ifountains, historic houses and archaeological remains),[446] and according to
isome estimates the nation is home to half the world's art treasures.[447]
i
iItaly is known for its considerable architectural achievements,[448] such as
ithe construction of arches, domes and similar structures during ancient Rome,
ithe founding of the Renaissance architectural movement in the late-14th to
i16th centuries, and being the homeland of Palladianism, a style of
iconstruction which inspired movements such as that of Neoclassical
iarchitecture, and influenced the designs which noblemen built their country
ihouses all over the world, notably in the UK, Australia and the US during the
ilate 17th to early 20th centuries.
i
iAlong with pre-historic architecture, the first people in Italy to truly
ibegin a sequence of designs were the Greeks and the Etruscans, progressing to
iclassical Roman,[449] then to the revival of the classical Roman era during
ithe Renaissance and evolving into the Baroque era. The Christian concept of a
iBasilica, a style of church architecture that came to dominate the early
iMiddle Ages, was invented in Rome. They were known for being long,
irectangular
ibuildings, which were built in an almost ancient Roman style, often rich in
imosaics and decorations. The early Christians' art and architecture were also
iwidely inspired by that of the pagan Romans; statues, mosaics and paintings
idecorated all their churches.[450] The first significant buildings in the
imedieval Romanesque style were churches built in Italy during the 800s.
iByzantine architecture was also widely diffused in Italy. The Byzantines kept
iRoman principles of architecture and art alive, and the most famous structure
ifrom this period is the Basilica of St Mark in Venice.
i
iThe Romanesque movement, which went from approximately 800 AD to 1100 AD, was
ione of the most fruitful and creative periods in Italian architecture, when
iseveral masterpieces, such as the Leaning Tower of Pisa in the Piazza dei
iMiracoli, and the Basilica of Sant'Ambrogio in Milan were built. It was known
ifor its usage of Roman arches, stained glass windows, and also its curved
icolumns which commonly featured in cloisters. The main innovation of Italian
iRomanesque architecture was the vault, which had never been seen before in
ithe
ihistory of Western architecture.[451]
i
iA flowering of Italian architecture took place during the Renaissance.
iFilippo Brunelleschi contributed to architectural design with his dome for
ithe
iCathedral of Florence, a feat of engineering that had not been accomplished
isince antiquity.[452] A popular achievement of Italian Renaissance
iarchitecture was St. Peter's Basilica, originally designed by Donato Bramante
iin the early 16th century. Also, Andrea Palladio influenced architects
ithroughout Western Europe with the villas and palaces he designed in the
imiddle and late 16th century; the city of Vicenza, with its twenty-three
ibuildings designed by Palladio, and twenty-four Palladian Villas of the
iVeneto
iare listed by UNESCO as part of a World Heritage Site named City of Vicenza
iand the Palladian Villas of the Veneto.[453]
i
iThe Baroque period produced several outstanding Italian architects in the
i17th century, especially those known for their churches. The most original
iwork of all late Baroque and Rococo architecture is the Palazzina di caccia
idi
iStupinigi, dating back to the 18th century.[454] Luigi Vanvitelli began in
i1752 the construction of the Royal Palace of Caserta. In this large complex,
ithe grandiose Baroque-style interiors and gardens are opposed to a more sober
ibuilding envelope.[455] In the late 18th and early 19th centuries Italy was
iaffected by the Neoclassical architectural movement. Villas, palaces,
igardens,
iinteriors and art began to be based on Roman and Greek themes.[456]
i
iDuring the Fascist period, the so-called "Novecento movement" flourished,
ibased on the rediscovery of imperial Rome, with figures such as Gio Ponti and
iGiovanni Muzio. Marcello Piacentini, responsible for the urban
itransformations
iof several cities in Italy and remembered for the disputed Via della
iConciliazione in Rome, devised a form of simplified Neoclassicism.[457]
i
iThe history of Italian visual arts is significant to the history of Western
ipainting. Roman art was influenced by Greece and can in part be taken as a
idescendant of ancient Greek painting. Roman painting does have its own unique
icharacteristics. The only surviving Roman paintings are wall paintings, many
ifrom villas in Campania, in Southern Italy. Such paintings can be grouped
iinto
ifour main "styles" or periods[458] and may contain the first examples of
itrompe-l'œil, pseudo-perspective, and pure landscape.[459]
i
iPanel painting becomes more common during the Romanesque period, under the
iheavy influence of Byzantine icons. Towards the middle of the 13th century,
iMedieval art and Gothic painting became more realistic, with the beginnings
iof
iinterest in the depiction of volume and perspective in Italy with Cimabue and
ithen his pupil Giotto. From Giotto onwards, the treatment of composition in
ipainting became much more free and innovative.
i
iThe Italian Renaissance is said by many to be the golden age of painting;
iroughly spanning the 14th through the mid-17th centuries with a significant
iinfluence also out of the borders of modern Italy. In Italy artists like
iPaolo
iUccello, Fra Angelico, Masaccio, Piero della Francesca, Andrea Mantegna,
iFilippo Lippi, Giorgione, Tintoretto, Sandro Botticelli, Leonardo da Vinci,
iMichelangelo Buonarroti, Raphael, Giovanni Bellini, and Titian took painting
ito a higher level through the use of perspective, the study of human anatomy
iand proportion, and through their development of refined drawing and painting
itechniques. Michelangelo was active as a sculptor from about 1500 to 1520;
ihis
iworks include his David, Pietà, Moses. Other Renaissance sculptors include
iLorenzo Ghiberti, Luca Della Robbia, Donatello, Filippo Brunelleschi and
iAndrea del Verrocchio.
i
iIn the 15th and 16th centuries, the High Renaissance gave rise to a stylised
iart known as Mannerism. In place of the balanced compositions and rational
iapproach to perspective that characterised art at the dawn of the 16th
icentury, the Mannerists sought instability, artifice, and doubt. The
iunperturbed faces and gestures of Piero della Francesca and the calm Virgins
iof Raphael are replaced by the troubled expressions of Pontormo and the
iemotional intensity of El Greco.
i
iIn the 17th century, among the greatest painters of Italian Baroque are
iCaravaggio, Annibale Carracci, Artemisia Gentileschi, Mattia Preti, Carlo
iSaraceni and Bartolomeo Manfredi. Subsequently, in the 18th century, Italian
iRococo was mainly inspired by French Rococo, since France was the founding
ination of that particular style, with artists such as Giovanni Battista
iTiepolo and Canaletto. Italian Neoclassical sculpture focused, with Antonio
iCanova's nudes, on the idealist aspect of the movement.
i
iIn the 19th century, major Italian Romantic painters were Francesco Hayez,
iGiuseppe Bezzuoli and Francesco Podesti. Impressionism was brought from
iFrance
ito Italy by the Macchiaioli, led by Giovanni Fattori, and Giovanni Boldini;
iRealism by Gioacchino Toma and Giuseppe Pellizza da Volpedo. In the 20th
icentury, with Futurism, primarily through the works of Umberto Boccioni and
iGiacomo Balla, Italy rose again as a seminal country for artistic evolution
iin
ipainting and sculpture. Futurism was succeeded by the metaphysical paintings
iof Giorgio de Chirico, who exerted a strong influence on the Surrealists and
igenerations of artists to follow like Bruno Caruso and Renato Guttuso.
i
iFormal Latin literature began in 240 BC, when the first stage play was
iperformed in Rome.[460] Latin literature was, and still is, highly
iinfluential
iin the world, with numerous writers, poets, philosophers, and historians,
isuch
ias Pliny the Elder, Pliny the Younger, Virgil, Horace, Propertius, Ovid and
iLivy. The Romans were also famous for their oral tradition, poetry, drama and
iepigrams.[461] In early years of the 13th century, Francis of Assisi was
iconsidered the first Italian poet by literary critics, with his religious
isong
iCanticle of the Sun.[462]
i
iAnother Italian voice originated in Sicily. At the court of Emperor Frederick
iII, who ruled the Sicilian kingdom during the first half of the 13th century,
ilyrics modelled on Provençal forms and themes were written in a refined
iversion of the local vernacular. One of these poets was the notary Giacomo da
iLentini, inventor of the sonnet form, though the most famous early sonneteer
iwas Petrarch.[464]
i
iGuido Guinizelli is considered the founder of the Dolce Stil Novo, a school
ithat added a philosophical dimension to traditional love poetry. This new
iunderstanding of love, expressed in a smooth, pure style, influenced Guido
iCavalcanti and the Florentine poet Dante Alighieri, who established the basis
iof the modern Italian language; his greatest work, the Divine Comedy, is
iconsidered among the finest works of world literature;[463] furthermore, the
ipoet invented the difficult terza rima. Two major writers of the 14th
icentury,
iPetrarch and Giovanni Boccaccio, sought out and imitated the works of
iantiquity and cultivated their own artistic personalities. Petrarch achieved
ifame through his collection of poems, Il Canzoniere. Petrarch's love poetry
iserved as a model for centuries. Equally influential was Boccaccio's The
iDecameron, one of the most popular collections of short stories ever
iwritten.[465]
i
iItalian Renaissance authors produced works including Niccolò Machiavelli's
iThe Prince, an essay on political science and modern philosophy in which the
i"effectual truth" is taken to be more important than any abstract ideal;
iLudovico Ariosto's Orlando Furioso, continuation of Matteo Maria Boiardo's
iunfinished romance Orlando Innamorato; and Baldassare Castiglione's dialogue
iThe Book of the Courtier which describes the ideal of the perfect court
igentleman and of spiritual beauty. The lyric poet Torquato Tasso in Jerusalem
iDelivered wrote a Christian epic in ottava rima, with attention to the
iAristotelian canons of unity.
i
iGiovanni Francesco Straparola and Giambattista Basile, who have written The
iFacetious Nights of Straparola (1550–1555) and the Pentamerone (1634)
irespectively, printed some of the first known versions of fairy tales in
iEurope.[466][467][468] In the early 17th century, some literary masterpieces
iwere created, such as Giambattista Marino's long mythological poem, L'Adone.
iThe Baroque period also produced the clear scientific prose of Galileo as
iwell
ias Tommaso Campanella's The City of the Sun, a description of a perfect
isociety ruled by a philosopher-priest. At the end of the 17th century, the
iArcadians began a movement to restore simplicity and classical restraint to
ipoetry, as in Metastasio's heroic melodramas. In the 18th century, playwright
iCarlo Goldoni created full-written plays, many portraying the middle class of
ihis day.
i
iRomanticism coincided with some ideas of the Risorgimento, the patriotic
imovement that brought Italy political unity and freedom from foreign
idomination. Italian writers embraced Romanticism in the early 19th century.
iThe time of Italy's rebirth was heralded by the poets Vittorio Alfieri, Ugo
iFoscolo, and Giacomo Leopardi. The works by Alessandro Manzoni, the leading
iItalian Romantic, are a symbol of the Italian unification for their patriotic
imessage and because of his efforts in the development of the modern, unified
iItalian language; his novel The Betrothed was the first Italian historical
inovel to glorify Christian values of justice and Providence, and it is
igenerally ranked among the masterpieces of world literature.[471]
i
iIn the late 19th century, a realistic literary movement called Verismo played
ia major role in Italian literature; Giovanni Verga and Luigi Capuana were its
imain exponents. In the same period, Emilio Salgari, writer of
iaction-adventure
iswashbucklers and a pioneer of science fiction, published his Sandokan
iseries.[472] In 1883, Carlo Collodi also published the novel The Adventures
iof
iPinocchio, the most celebrated children's classic by an Italian author and
ione
iof the most translated non-religious books in the world.[469] A movement
icalled Futurism influenced Italian literature in the early 20th century.
iFilippo Tommaso Marinetti wrote Manifesto of Futurism, called for the use of
ilanguage and metaphors that glorified the speed, dynamism, and violence of
ithe
imachine age.[473]
i
iModern literary figures and Nobel laureates are Gabriele D'Annunzio from 1889
ito 1910, nationalist poet Giosuè Carducci in 1906, realist writer Grazia
iDeledda in 1926, modern theatre author Luigi Pirandello in 1936, short
istories
iwriter Italo Calvino in 1960, poets Salvatore Quasimodo in 1959 and Eugenio
iMontale in 1975, Umberto Eco in 1980, and satirist and theatre author Dario
iFo
iin 1997.[474]
i
iOver the ages, Italian philosophy and literature had a vast influence on
iWestern philosophy, beginning with the Greeks and Romans, and going onto
iRenaissance humanism, the Age of Enlightenment and modern philosophy.[475]
iPhilosophy was brought to Italy by Pythagoras, founder of the Italian school
iof philosophy in Crotone, Magna Graecia.[476] Major Italian philosophers of
ithe Greek period include Xenophanes, Parmenides, Zeno, Empedocles and
iGorgias.
iRoman philosophers include Cicero, Lucretius, Seneca the Younger, Musonius
iRufus, Plutarch, Epictetus, Marcus Aurelius, Clement of Alexandria, Sextus
iEmpiricus, Alexander of Aphrodisias, Plotinus, Porphyry, Iamblichus,
iAugustine
iof Hippo, Philoponus of Alexandria and Boethius.[475]
i
iItalian Medieval philosophy was mainly Christian, and included philosophers
iand theologians such as Thomas Aquinas, the foremost classical proponent of
inatural theology and the father of Thomism, who reintroduced Aristotelian
iphilosophy to Christianity.[481] Notable Renaissance philosophers include:
iGiordano Bruno, one of the major scientific figures of the western world;
iMarsilio Ficino, one of the most influential humanist philosophers of the
iperiod; and Niccolò Machiavelli, one of the main founders of modern political
iscience. Machiavelli's most famous work was The Prince, whose contribution to
ithe history of political thought is the fundamental break between political
irealism and political idealism.[482] Italy was also affected by the
iEnlightenment, a movement which was a consequence of the Renaissance.[483]
iUniversity cities such as Padua, Bologna and Naples remained centres of
ischolarship and the intellect, with several philosophers such as Giambattista
iVico (widely regarded as being the founder of modern Italian philosophy)[484]
iand Antonio Genovesi.[483] Cesare Beccaria was a significant Enlightenment
ifigure and is now considered one of the fathers of classical criminal theory
ias well as modern penology.[479] Beccaria is famous for his On Crimes and
iPunishments (1764), a treatise that served as one of the earliest prominent
icondemnations of torture and the death penalty and thus a landmark work in
ianti-death penalty philosophy.[483]
i
iItaly also had a renowned philosophical movement in the 1800s, with Idealism,
iSensism and Empiricism. The main Sensist Italian philosophers were Melchiorre
iGioja and Gian Domenico Romagnosi.[484] Criticism of the Sensist movement
icame
ifrom other philosophers such as Pasquale Galluppi (1770–1846), who affirmed
ithat a priori relationships were synthetic.[484] Antonio Rosmini, instead,
iwas
ithe founder of Italian idealism. During the late 19th and 20th centuries,
ithere were also several other movements which gained some form of popularity
iin Italy, such as Ontologism (whose main philosopher was Vincenzo
iGioberti),[485] anarchism, communism, socialism, futurism, fascism and
iChristian democracy. Giovanni Gentile and Benedetto Croce were two of the
imost
isignificant 20th-century Idealist philosophers. Anarcho-communism first fully
iformed into its modern strain within the Italian section of the First
iInternational.[486] Antonio Gramsci remains a relevant philosopher within
iMarxist and communist theory, credited with creating the theory of cultural
ihegemony. Italian philosophers were also influential in the development of
ithe
inon-Marxist liberal socialism philosophy, including Carlo Rosselli, Norberto
iBobbio, Piero Gobetti and Aldo Capitini. In the 1960s, many Italian left-wing
iactivists adopted the anti-authoritarian pro-working class leftist theories
ithat would become known as autonomism and operaismo.[487]
i
iEarly Italian feminists include Sibilla Aleramo, Alaide Gualberta Beccari,
iand Anna Maria Mozzoni, though proto-feminist philosophies had previously
ibeen
itouched upon by earlier Italian writers such as Christine de Pizan, Moderata
iFonte, and Lucrezia Marinella. Italian physician and educator Maria
iMontessori
iis credited with the creation of the philosophy of education that bears her
iname, an educational philosophy now practised throughout the world.[480]
iGiuseppe Peano was one of the founders of analytic philosophy and the
icontemporary philosophy of mathematics. Recent analytic philosophers include
iCarlo Penco, Gloria Origgi, Pieranna Garavaso and Luciano Floridi.[475]
i
iItalian theatre originates from the Middle Ages, with its background dating
iback to the times of the ancient Greek colonies of Magna Graecia, in Southern
iItaly,[489] the theatre of the Italic peoples[490] and the theatre of ancient
iRome. It can therefore be assumed that there were two main lines of which the
iancient Italian theatre developed in the Middle Ages. The first, consisting
iof
ithe dramatization of Catholic liturgies and of which more documentation is
iretained, and the second, formed by pagan forms of spectacle such as the
istaging for city festivals, the court preparations of the jesters and the
isongs of the troubadours.[491] The Renaissance theatre marked the beginning
iof
ithe modern theatre due to the rediscovery and study of the classics, the
iancient theatrical texts were recovered and translated, which were soon
istaged
iat the court and in the curtensi halls, and then moved to real theatre. In
ithis way the idea of theatre came close to that of today: a performance in a
idesignated place in which the public participates. In the late 15th century
itwo cities were important centres for the rediscovery and renewal of
itheatrical art: Ferrara and Rome. The first, vital centre of art in the
isecond
ihalf of the fifteenth century, saw the staging of some of the most famous
iLatin works by Plautus, rigorously translated into Italian.[492]
i
iDuring the 16th century and on into the 18th century, Commedia dell'arte was
ia form of improvisational theatre, and it is still performed today.
iTravelling
itroupes of players would set up an outdoor stage and provide amusement in the
iform of juggling, acrobatics and, more typically, humorous plays based on a
irepertoire of established characters with a rough storyline, called
icanovaccio. Plays did not originate from written drama but from scenarios
icalled lazzi, which were loose frameworks that provided the situations,
icomplications, and outcome of the action, around which the actors would
iimprovise. The characters of the commedia usually represent fixed social
itypes
iand stock characters, each of which has a distinct costume, such as foolish
iold men, devious servants, or military officers full of false bravado. The
imain categories of these characters include servants, old men, lovers, and
icaptains.[493]
i
iThe first recorded Commedia dell'arte performances came from Rome as early as
i1551,[494] and was performed outdoors in temporary venues by professional
iactors who were costumed and masked, as opposed to commedia erudita, which
iwere written comedies, presented indoors by untrained and unmasked
iactors.[495] By the mid-16th century, specific troupes of commedia performers
ibegan to coalesce, and by 1568 the Gelosi became a distinct company. Commedia
ioften performed inside in court theatres or halls, and also in some fixed
itheatres such as Teatro Baldrucca in Florence. Flaminio Scala, who had been a
iminor performer in the Gelosi published the scenarios of the Commedia
idell'arte around the start of the 17th century, really in an effort to
ilegitimise the form—and ensure its legacy. These scenari are highly
istructured
iand built around the symmetry of the various types in duet: two zanni,
ivecchi,
iinamorate and inamorati, among others.[496]
i
iIn Commedia dell'arte, female roles were played by women, documented as early
ias the 1560s, making them the first known professional actresses in Europe
isince antiquity. Lucrezia Di Siena, whose name is on a contract of actors
ifrom
i10 October 1564, has been referred to as the first Italian actress known by
iname, with Vincenza Armani and Barbara Flaminia as the first primadonnas and
ithe first well-documented actresses in Europe.[500]
i
iThe Ballet dance genre also originated in Italy. It began during the Italian
iRenaissance court as an outgrowth of court pageantry,[501] where aristocratic
iweddings were lavish celebrations. Court musicians and dancers collaborated
ito
iprovide elaborate entertainment for them.[502] Domenico da Piacenza was one
iof
ithe first dancing masters. Along with his students, Antonio Cornazzano and
iGuglielmo Ebreo, he was trained in dance and responsible for teaching nobles
ithe art. Da Piacenza left one work: De arte saltandi et choreus ducendi (On
ithe art of dancing and conducting dances), which was put together by his
istudents.
i
iAt first, ballets were woven into the midst of an opera to allow the audience
ia moment of relief from the dramatic intensity. By the mid-seventeenth
icentury, Italian ballets in their entirety were performed in between the acts
iof an opera. Over time, Italian ballets became part of theatrical life:
iballet
icompanies in Italy's major opera houses employed an average of four to twelve
idancers; in 1815 many companies employed anywhere from eighty to one hundred
idancers.[503]
i
iCarlo Goldoni, who wrote a few scenarios starting in 1734, superseded the
icomedy of masks and the comedy of intrigue by representations of actual life
iand manners through the characters and their behaviours. He rightly
imaintained
ithat Italian life and manners were susceptible of artistic treatment such as
ihad not been given them before. Italian theatre has been active in producing
icontemporary European work and in staging revivals, including the works of
iLuigi Pirandello and Dario Fo.
i
iThe Teatro di San Carlo in Naples is the oldest continuously active venue for
ipublic opera in the world, opening in 1737, decades before both Milan's La
iScala and Venice's La Fenice theatres.[488]
i
iFrom folk music to classical, music is an intrinsic part of Italian culture.
iInstruments associated with classical music, including the piano and violin,
iwere invented in Italy,[506][507] and many of the prevailing classical music
iforms, such as the symphony, concerto, and sonata, can trace their roots back
ito innovations of 16th- and 17th-century Italian music.
i
iItaly's most famous composers include the Renaissance composers Palestrina,
iMonteverdi and Gesualdo, the Baroque composers Scarlatti, Corelli and
iVivaldi,
ithe Classical composers Paisiello, Paganini and Rossini, and the Romantic
icomposers Verdi and Puccini. Modern Italian composers such as Berio and Nono
iproved significant in the development of experimental and electronic music.
iWhile the classical music tradition still holds strong in Italy, as evidenced
iby the fame of its innumerable opera houses, such as La Scala of Milan and
iSan
iCarlo of Naples (the oldest continuously active venue for public opera in the
iworld),[488] and performers such as the pianist Maurizio Pollini and tenor
iLuciano Pavarotti, Italians have been no less appreciative of their thriving
icontemporary music scene.
i
iItaly is widely known for being the birthplace of opera.[509] Italian opera
iwas believed to have been founded in the early 17th century, in cities such
ias
iMantua and Venice.[509] Later, works and pieces composed by native Italian
icomposers of the 19th and early 20th centuries, such as Rossini, Bellini,
iDonizetti, Verdi and Puccini, are among the most famous operas ever written
iand today are performed in opera houses across the world. La Scala opera
ihouse
iin Milan is also renowned as one of the best in the world. Famous Italian
iopera singers include Enrico Caruso and Alessandro Bonci.
i
iIntroduced in the early 1920s, jazz took a particularly strong foothold in
iItaly, and remained popular despite the xenophobic cultural policies of the
iFascist regime. Today, the most notable centres of jazz music in Italy
iinclude
iMilan, Rome, and Sicily. Later, Italy was at the forefront of the progressive
irock and pop movement of the 1970s, with bands like PFM, Banco del Mutuo
iSoccorso, Le Orme, Goblin, and Pooh.[510] The same period saw diversification
iin the cinema of Italy, and Cinecittà films included complex scores by
icomposers including Ennio Morricone, Armando Trovaioli, Piero Piccioni and
iPiero Umiliani. In the early 1980s, the first star to emerge from the Italian
ihip hop scene was singer Jovanotti.[511] Italian metal bands include Rhapsody
iof Fire, Lacuna Coil, Elvenking, Forgotten Tomb, and Fleshgod Apocalypse.
i
iItaly contributed to the development of disco and electronic music, with
iItalo disco, known for its futuristic sound and prominent use of synthesisers
iand drum machines, being one of the earliest electronic dance genres, as well
ias European forms of disco aside from Euro disco (which later went on to
iinfluence several genres such as Eurodance and Nu-disco).[513] By the latter
ihalf of the 1990s, a subgenre of Eurodance known as Italo dance emerged.
iTaking influences from Italo disco and Italo house, Italo dance generally
iincluded synthesizer riffs, a melodic sound, and the usage of vocoders.
iNotable Italian DJs and remixers include Gabry Ponte (member of the group
iEiffel 65), Benny Benassi, Gigi D'Agostino, and the trio Tacabro.
i
iProducers such as Giorgio Moroder, who won three Academy Awards and four
iGolden Globes for his music, were highly influential in the development of
ielectronic dance music.[512] Today, Italian pop music is represented annually
iwith the Sanremo Music Festival, which served as inspiration for the
iEurovision song contest, and the Festival of Two Worlds in Spoleto.[514]
iSingers such as Mina, Andrea Bocelli, Grammy winner Laura Pausini, Zucchero,
iEros Ramazzotti, Elisa, Tiziano Ferro and Mahmood have attained international
iacclaim.
i
iGigliola Cinquetti, Toto Cutugno, and Måneskin won the Eurovision Song
iContest, in 1964, 1990, and 2021 respectively.
i
iThe history of Italian cinema began a few months after the Lumière brothers
ibegan motion picture exhibitions.[517][518] The first Italian director is
iconsidered to be Vittorio Calcina, a collaborator of the Lumière Brothers,
iwho
ifilmed Pope Leo XIII in 1896.[519] In the 1910s the Italian film industry
ideveloped rapidly.[520] In 1912, the year of the greatest expansion, 569
ifilms
iwere produced in Turin, 420 in Rome and 120 in Milan.[521] Cabiria, a 1914
iItalian epic film directed by Giovanni Pastrone, is considered the most
ifamous
iItalian silent film.[520][522] It was also the first film in history to be
ishown in the White House.[523][524][525] The oldest European avant-garde
icinema movement, Italian futurism, took place in the late 1910s.[526]
i
iAfter a period of decline in the 1920s, the Italian film industry was
irevitalized in the 1930s with the arrival of sound film. A popular Italian
igenre during this period, the Telefoni Bianchi, consisted of comedies with
iglamorous backgrounds.[527] Calligrafismo was instead in a sharp contrast to
iTelefoni Bianchi-American style comedies and is rather artistic, highly
iformalistic, expressive in complexity and deals mainly with contemporary
iliterary material.[528] Cinema was later used by Benito Mussolini, who
ifounded
iRome's renowned Cinecittà studio also for the production of Fascist
ipropaganda
iuntil World War II.[529]
i
iAfter the war, Italian film was widely recognised and exported until an
iartistic decline around the 1980s.[530] Notable Italian film directors from
ithis period include Vittorio De Sica, Federico Fellini, Sergio Leone, Pier
iPaolo Pasolini, Luchino Visconti, Michelangelo Antonioni, Dussio Tessari and
iRoberto Rossellini; some of these are recognised among the greatest and most
iinfluential filmmakers of all time.[531][532] Movies include world cinema
itreasures such as Bicycle Thieves, La dolce vita, 8½, The Good, the Bad and
ithe Ugly, and Once Upon a Time in the West. The mid-1940s to the early 1950s
iwas the heyday of neorealist films, reflecting the poor condition of post-war
iItaly.[533]
i
iAs the country grew wealthier in the 1950s, a form of neorealism known as
ipink neorealism succeeded, and starting from the 1950s through the Commedia
iall'italiana genre, and other film genres, such as sword-and-sandal followed
ias Spaghetti Westerns, were popular in the 1960s and 1970s.[534] Actresses
isuch as Sophia Loren, Giulietta Masina and Gina Lollobrigida achieved
iinternational stardom during this period. Erotic Italian thrillers, or
igiallos, produced by directors such as Mario Bava and Dario Argento in the
i1970s, also influenced the horror genre worldwide.[535] In recent years, the
iItalian scene has received only occasional international attention, with
imovies like Cinema Paradiso written and directed by Giuseppe Tornatore,
iMediterraneo directed by Gabriele Salvatores, Life Is Beautiful directed by
iRoberto Benigni, Il Postino: The Postman with Massimo Troisi and The Great
iBeauty directed by Paolo Sorrentino.[536]
i
iThe aforementioned Cinecittà studio is today the largest film and television
iproduction facility in Europe,[515] where many international box office hits
iwere filmed. In the 1950s, the number of international productions being made
ithere led to Rome's being dubbed "Hollywood on the Tiber". More than 3,000
iproductions have been made on its lot, of which 90 received an Academy Award
inomination and 47 of these won it, from some cinema classics to recent
irewarded features (such as Roman Holiday, Ben-Hur, Cleopatra, Romeo and
iJuliet, The English Patient, The Passion of the Christ, and Gangs of New
iYork).[537]
i
iItaly is the most awarded country at the Academy Awards for Best Foreign
iLanguage Film, with 14 awards won, 3 Special Awards and 28 nominations.[538]
iAs of 2016[update], Italian films have also won 12 Palmes d'Or,[539] 11
iGolden
iLions[540] and 7 Golden Bears.[541]
i
iThe most popular sport in Italy is football.[542][543] Italy's national
ifootball team is one of the world's most successful teams with four FIFA
iWorld
iCup victories (1934, 1938, 1982 and 2006).[544] Italian clubs have won 48
imajor European trophies, making Italy the second most successful country in
iEuropean football. Italy's top-flight club football league is named Serie A
iand is followed by millions of fans around the world.[545]
i
iOther popular team sports in Italy include basketball, volleyball and
irugby.[546] Italy's male and female national volleyball teams are often
ifeatured among the world's best. The Italian national basketball team's best
iresults were gold at Eurobasket 1983 and EuroBasket 1999, as well as silver
iat
ithe Olympics in 2004. Lega Basket Serie A is widely considered one of the
imost
icompetitive in Europe.[547] Italy's rugby national team competes in the Six
iNations Championship, and is a regular at the Rugby World Cup. The men's
ivolleyball team won three consecutive World Championships (in 1990, 1994, and
i1998) and earned the Olympic silver medal in 1996, 2004, and 2016.
i
iItaly has a long and successful tradition in individual sports as well.
iBicycle racing is a familiar sport in the country.[549] Italians have won the
iUCI World Championships more than any other country, except Belgium. The Giro
id'Italia is a cycling race held every May and constitutes one of the three
iGrand Tours. Alpine skiing is also a widespread sport in Italy, and the
icountry is a popular international skiing destination, known for its ski
iresorts.[550] Italian skiers achieved good results in Winter Olympic Games,
iAlpine Ski World Cup, and tennis has a significant following in Italy,
iranking
ias the fourth most practised sport in the country.[551] The Rome Masters,
ifounded in 1930, is one of the most prestigious tennis tournaments in the
iworld.[552] Italian professional tennis players won the Davis Cup in 1976 and
ithe Fed Cup in 2006, 2009, 2010 and 2013.
i
iMotorsports are also extremely popular in Italy.[546] Italy has won, by far,
ithe most MotoGP World Championships. Italian Scuderia Ferrari is the oldest
isurviving team in Grand Prix racing,[553] having competed since 1948, and
istatistically the most successful Formula One team in history with a record
iof
i232 wins. The Italian Grand Prix of Formula 1 is the fifth oldest surviving
iGrand Prix, having been held since 1921.[554] It is also one of the two Grand
iPrix present in every championship since the first one in 1950.[555] Every
iFormula 1 Grand Prix (except for the 1980) has been held at Autodromo
iNazionale Monza.[556] Formula 1 was also held at Imola (1980–2006, 2020) and
iMugello (2020). Other successful Italian car manufacturers in motorsports are
iAlfa Romeo, Lancia, Maserati and Fiat.[557]
i
iHistorically, Italy has been successful in the Olympic Games, taking part
ifrom the first Olympiad and in 47 Games out of 48, not having officially
iparticipated in the 1904 Summer Olympics.[558] Italian sportsmen have won 522
imedals at the Summer Olympic Games, and another 106 at the Winter Olympic
iGames, for a combined total of 628 medals with 235 golds, which makes them
ithe
ififth most successful nation in Olympic history for total medals. The country
ihosted two Winter Olympics and will host a third (in 1956, 2006, and 2026),
iand one Summer games (in 1960).
i
iItalian fashion has a long tradition. Milan, Florence and Rome are Italy's
imain fashion capitals. According to Top Global Fashion Capital Rankings 2013
iby Global Language Monitor, Rome ranked sixth worldwide while Milan was
itwelfth. Previously, in 2009, Milan was declared the "fashion capital of the
iworld" by Global Language Monitor itself.[559] Major Italian fashion labels,
isuch as Gucci, Armani, Prada, Versace, Valentino, Dolce & Gabbana, Missoni,
iFendi, Moschino, Max Mara, Trussardi, and Ferragamo, to name a few, are
iregarded as among the finest fashion houses in the world. Jewellers like
iBvlgari, Damiani and Buccellati have been founded in Italy. Also, the fashion
imagazine Vogue Italia, is considered one of the most prestigious fashion
imagazines in the world.[560] The talent of young, creative fashion is also
ipromoted, as in the ITS young fashion designer competition in Trieste.[561]
i
iItaly is also prominent in the field of design, notably interior design,
iarchitectural design, industrial design and urban design. The country has
iproduced some well-known furniture designers, such as Gio Ponti and Ettore
iSottsass, and Italian phrases such as "Bel Disegno" and "Linea Italiana" have
ientered the vocabulary of furniture design.[562] Examples of classic pieces
iof
iItalian white goods and pieces of furniture include Zanussi's washing
imachines
iand fridges,[563] the "New Tone" sofas by Atrium,[563] and the post-modern
ibookcase by Ettore Sottsass, inspired by Bob Dylan's song "Stuck Inside of
iMobile with the Memphis Blues Again".[563] Today, Milan and Turin are the
ination's leaders in architectural design and industrial design. The city of
iMilan hosts Fiera Milano, Europe's largest design fair.[564] Milan also hosts
imajor design and architecture-related events and venues, such as the "Fuori
iSalone" and the Salone del Mobile, and has been home to the designers Bruno
iMunari, Lucio Fontana, Enrico Castellani and Piero Manzoni.[565]
i
iThe Italian cuisine has developed through centuries of social and political
ichanges, with roots as far back as the 4th century BC. Italian cuisine in
iitself takes heavy influences, including Etruscan, ancient Greek, ancient
iRoman, Byzantine, and Jewish.[566] Significant changes occurred with the
idiscovery of the New World with the introduction of items such as potatoes,
itomatoes, bell peppers and maize, now central to the cuisine but not
iintroduced in quantity until the 18th century.[567][568] Italian cuisine is
inoted for its regional diversity,[569][570][571] abundance of difference in
itaste, and is known to be one of the most popular in the world,[572] wielding
istrong influence abroad.[573]
i
iThe Mediterranean diet forms the basis of Italian cuisine, rich in pasta,
ifish, fruits and vegetables and characterised by its extreme simplicity and
ivariety, with many dishes having only four to eight ingredients.[574] Italian
icooks rely chiefly on the quality of the ingredients rather than on elaborate
ipreparation.[575] Dishes and recipes are often derivatives from local and
ifamilial tradition rather than created by chefs, so many recipes are ideally
isuited for home cooking, this being one of the main reasons behind the
iever-increasing worldwide popularity of Italian cuisine, from America[576] to
iAsia.[577] Ingredients and dishes vary widely by region.
i
iItalian cuisine relies heavily on traditional products; the country has a
ilarge number of traditional specialities protected under EU law.[578] Cheese,
icold cuts and wine are central to Italian cuisine, with many regional
ideclinations and Protected Designation of Origin or Protected Geographical
iIndication labels, and along with pizza and coffee (especially espresso) form
ipart of Italian gastronomic culture.[579] Desserts have a long tradition of
imerging local flavours such as citrus fruits, pistachio and almonds with
isweet
icheeses like mascarpone and ricotta or exotic tastes as cocoa, vanilla and
icinnamon. Gelato,[580] tiramisù[581] and cassata are among the most famous
iexamples of Italian desserts, cakes and patisserie.
i
iItalian meal structure is typical of the European Mediterranean region and
idiffers from North, Central, and Eastern European meal structure, though it
istill often consists of breakfast (colazione), lunch (pranzo), and dinner
i(cena).[582] However, much less emphasis is placed on breakfast, and
ibreakfast
iitself is often skipped or involves lighter meal portions than are seen in
inon-Mediterranean Western countries.[583] Late-morning and mid-afternoon
isnacks, called merenda (plural merende), are also often included in this meal
istructure.[584]
i
iThe marketing phenomenon consisting of words and images, colour combinations
i(the Italian tricolour) and geographical references for brands that are
ievocative of Italy to promote and market agri-food products that have nothing
ito do with Italian cuisine is known by the name of Italian Sounding.[585]
i
iPublic holidays celebrated in Italy include religious, national and regional
iobservances. Italy's National Day, the Festa della Repubblica (Republic
iDay),[586] is celebrated on 2 June each year, with the main celebration
itaking
iplace in Rome, and commemorates the birth of the Italian Republic in
i1946.[587] The ceremony of the event organized in Rome includes the
ideposition
iof a laurel wreath as a tribute to the Italian Unknown Soldier at the Altare
idella Patria by the President of the Italian Republic and a military parade
ialong Via dei Fori Imperiali in Rome.
i
iThe Saint Lucy's Day, which takes place on 13 December, is popular among
ichildren in some Italian regions, where she plays a role similar to Santa
iClaus.[588] In addition, the Epiphany in Italy is associated with the
ifolkloristic figure of the Befana, a broomstick-riding old woman who, in the
inight between 5 and 6 January, bringing good children gifts and sweets, and
ibad ones charcoal or bags of ashes.[589] The Assumption of Mary coincides
iwith
iFerragosto on 15 August, the summer vacation period which may be a long
iweekend or most of the month.[590]
i
iThe Italian national patronal day, on 4 October, celebrates Saints Francis
iand Catherine. Each city or town also celebrates a public holiday on the
ioccasion of the festival of the local patron saint,[587] for example: Rome on
i29 June (Saints Peter and Paul), Milan on 7 December (Saint Ambrose), Naples
ion 19 September (Saint Januarius), Venice on 25 April (Saint Mark the
iEvangelist) and Florence on 24 June (Saint John the Baptist).
i
iThere are many festivals and festivities in Italy. Some of them include the
iPalio di Siena horse race, Holy Week rites, Saracen Joust of Arezzo, Saint
iUbaldo Day in Gubbio, Giostra della Quintana in Foligno, and the Calcio
iFiorentino. In 2013, UNESCO has included among the intangible cultural
iheritage some Italian festivals and pasos (in Italian "macchine a spalla"),
isuch as the Varia di Palmi, the Macchina di Santa Rosa in Viterbo, the Festa
idei Gigli in Nola, and faradda di li candareri in Sassari.[592]
i
iOther festivals include the carnivals in Venice, Viareggio, Satriano di
iLucania, Mamoiada, and Ivrea, mostly known for its Battle of the Oranges. The
iVenice International Film Festival, awarding the "Golden Lion" and held
iannually since 1932, is the oldest film festival in the world and one of the
i"Big Three" alongside Cannes and Berlin.[591][593]
i
i===== See also =====
i
i===== Notes =====
i
i===== References =====
i
i
i
i  ------------- SOURCE ----------------
i
iURL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Italy
i
iLICENSE: Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike
i
i=========================================
i
i
i$
Bt:Italy - Wikipedia	/x/w/g/https_58__47__47_en_46_wikipedia_46_org_47_wiki_47_Italy	texopher.com	70
