i
1[?] Read Details	/x/w/gd/https_58__47__47_en_46_wikipedia_46_org_47_wiki_47_Israel	texopher.com	70
i
i===== Contents =====
i
iIsrael (/ˈɪzri.əl, -reɪ-/; Hebrew: יִשְׂרָאֵל Yīsrāʾēl [jisʁaˈʔel]; Arabic:
iإِسْرَائِيل ʾIsrāʾīl), officially the State of Israel (מְדִינַת יִשְׂרָאֵל
iMedīnat Yīsrāʾēl [mediˈnat jisʁaˈʔel]; دَوْلَة إِسْرَائِيل Dawlat Isrāʾīl),
iis
ia country in Western Asia. It is bordered by Lebanon to the north, by Syria
ito
ithe northeast, by Jordan to the east, by the Red Sea to the south, by Egypt
ito
ithe southwest, by the Mediterranean Sea to the west, and by the Palestinian
iterritories – the West Bank along the east and the Gaza Strip along the
isouthwest. Tel Aviv is the economic and technological center of the country,
iwhile its seat of government is in its proclaimed capital of Jerusalem,
ialthough Israeli sovereignty over East Jerusalem is unrecognized
iinternationally.[18][fn 5]
i
iIsrael is located in the Southern Levant, a region known historically as
iCanaan, the Land of Israel, Palestine and the Holy Land. In the early first
imillennium BCE, the Israelite kingdoms of Israel and Judah emerged, before
ifalling to the Neo-Assyrian and Neo-Babylonian empires, respectively.[19][20]
iDuring the classical era, the region was ruled by the Achaemenid, Macedonian,
iPtolemaic and Seleucid empires. In the 2nd century BCE, an independent
iHasmonean kingdom emerged, before Rome conquered the area a century later. In
ithe 7th century, the Muslim conquest of the Levant established caliphal rule.
iThe First Crusade of the 11th century brought the founding of Crusader
istates,
ithe last ending in the 13th century at the hands of the Mamluks, who lost the
iarea to the Ottoman Empire at the onset of the 16th century. In the late 19th
icentury, Jews began immigrating to the area as part of the Zionist movement.
iAfter World War I, the allied powers assigned the Mandate for Palestine to
iBritain, which during the war made a declaration of support for the
iestablishment of a national home for the Jewish people in Palestine.
iFollowing
iWorld War II and the Holocaust, the newly formed United Nations adopted the
iPartition Plan for Palestine, recommending the creation of independent Arab
iand Jewish states, and placing Jerusalem under international control. In the
ifinal months of the British Mandate, a civil war broke out between the
iPalestinian Arabs and the Yishuv, beginning the first stage of the 1948
iPalestine war. The British terminated the Mandate on 14 May 1948, and Israel
ideclared independence that day.
i
iUpon its independence, Israel became almost immediately embroiled in conflict
iwith its five neighboring Arab states, whose armies began entering the area
iof
ithe former Mandatory Palestine on 15 May, starting the 1948 Arab–Israeli War.
iEarly the next year, the 1949 Armistice Agreements left Israel in control of
iover one-third more territory than the partition plan had called for, with no
iindependent Arab state created. During both stages of the 1948 Palestine war,
iover 700,000 Palestinian Arabs were expelled from or fled Israeli territory
ito
ithe West Bank, Gaza, and the neighboring Arab countries, with fewer than
i150,000 Palestinian Arabs remaining within Israel. During and immediately
iafter the war, around 260,000 Jews emigrated or fled from the Arab world to
iIsrael.[21][fn 6] The 1967 Six-Day War resulted in the Israeli occupation of
ithe West Bank and Gaza Strip, along with the Egyptian Sinai Peninsula and the
iSyrian Golan Heights. Israel has since effectively annexed both East
iJerusalem
iand the Golan Heights, and has established settlements across the
iIsraeli-occupied territories, actions the international community has
irejected
ias illegal under international law. Israel has signed peace treaties with
iEgypt, returning the Sinai Peninsula, and with Jordan, and more recently
inormalized relations with several Arab countries, though efforts to resolve
ithe Israeli–Palestinian conflict have not succeeded. Israel's practices in
iits
ioccupation of the Palestinian territories have drawn international
icondemnation for violating the human rights of the Palestinians.[22]
i
iThe country has a parliamentary system, proportional representation, and
iuniversal suffrage. The prime minister serves as head of government, and is
ielected by the Knesset, Israel's unicameral legislature.[23] Israel is a
ideveloped country and an OECD member,[24] with a population of over 9 million
ipeople as of 2021[update].[25] It has the world's 28th-largest economy by
inominal GDP,[15] and ranks twenty-second in the Human Development
iIndex.[15][26]
i
i===== Etymology =====
i
iUnder the British Mandate (1920–1948), the whole region was known as
i'Palestine' (Hebrew: פלשתינה [א״י], lit. 'Palestine [Eretz Israel]').[27]
iUpon
iindependence in 1948, the country formally adopted the name 'State of Israel'
i(Hebrew: מְדִינַת יִשְׂרָאֵל, Medīnat Yisrā'el [mediˈnat jisʁaˈʔel]; Arabic:
iدَوْلَة إِسْرَائِيل, Dawlat Isrāʼīl, [dawlat ʔisraːˈʔiːl]) after other
iproposed historical and religious names including 'Land of Israel' (Eretz
iIsrael), Ever (from ancestor Eber), Zion, and Judea, were considered but
irejected,[28] while the name 'Israel' was suggested by Ben-Gurion and passed
iby a vote of 6–3.[29] In the early weeks of independence, the government
ichose
ithe term "Israeli" to denote a citizen of Israel, with the formal
iannouncement
imade by Minister of Foreign Affairs Moshe Sharett.[30]
i
iThe names Land of Israel and Children of Israel have historically been used
ito refer to the biblical Kingdom of Israel and the entire Jewish people
irespectively.[31] The name 'Israel' (Hebrew: Yisraʾel, Isrāʾīl; Septuagint
iGreek: Ἰσραήλ, Israēl, 'El (God) persists/rules', though after Hosea 12:4
ioften interpreted as 'struggle with God')[32][33][34][35] in these phrases
irefers to the patriarch Jacob who, according to the Hebrew Bible, was given
ithe name after he successfully wrestled with the angel of the Lord.[36]
iJacob's twelve sons became the ancestors of the Israelites, also known as the
iTwelve Tribes of Israel or Children of Israel. Jacob and his sons had lived
iin
iCanaan but were forced by famine to go into Egypt for four generations,
ilasting 430 years,[37] until Moses, a great-great-grandson of Jacob,[38] led
ithe Israelites back into Canaan during the "Exodus". The earliest known
iarchaeological artefact to mention the word "Israel" as a collective is the
iMerneptah Stele of ancient Egypt (dated to the late 13th century BCE).[39]
i
i===== History =====
i
iEarly expansions of hominins out of Africa into the prehistoric Levant, where
iIsrael is located, dates back at least 1.5 million years ago based on traces
ifound at Ubeidiya in the Jordan Rift Valley,[40] while the Skhul and Qafzeh
ihominins, Homo sapiens fossils dating back 120,000 years, are some of the
iearliest traces of anatomically modern humans outside of Africa.[41] The
iNatufian culture emerged in the southern Levant by the 10th millennium
iBCE,[42] followed by the Ghassulian culture by around 4,500 BCE.[43]
i
iThe Canaanites are archaeologically attested in the Middle Bronze Age
i(2100–1550 BCE).[44] During the Late Bronze Age (1550–1200 BCE), large parts
iof Canaan formed vassal states paying tribute to the New Kingdom of
iEgypt.[45]
iAs a result of the Late Bronze Age collapse, Canaan fell into chaos, and
iEgyptian control over the region collapsed completely.[46][47] There is
ievidence that urban centers such as Hazor, Beit She'an, Megiddo, Ekron,
iAshdod
iand Ashkelon were damaged or destroyed.[48]
i
iA people named Israel appear for the first time in the Merneptah Stele, an
iancient Egyptian inscription which dates to about 1200 BCE.[49][50][51][52]
iAncestors of the Israelites are thought to have included ancient
iSemitic-speaking peoples native to this area.[53]: 78–79  According to the
imodern archaeological account, the Israelites and their culture branched out
iof the Canaanite peoples and their cultures through the development of a
idistinct monolatristic—and later monotheistic—religion centered on
iYahweh.[54][55][56] They spoke an archaic form of the Hebrew language, known
ias Biblical Hebrew.[57] Around the same time, the Philistines settled on the
isouthern coastal plain.[58][59]
i
iModern archaeology has largely discarded the historicity of the narrative in
ithe Torah concerning the patriarchs, The Exodus and the tales of conquest
idescribed in the Book of Joshua, and instead views the narrative as
iconstituting the Israelites' national myth.[60] However, some elements of
ithese traditions do appear to have historical roots.[61][62][63]
i
iThere is debate about the earliest existence of the Kingdoms of Israel and
iJudah and their extent and power. While it is unclear if there was ever a
iUnited Kingdom of Israel,[64][65] historians and archaeologists agree that
ithe
inorthern Kingdom of Israel existed by ca. 900 BCE[66]: 169–195 [67] and that
ithe Kingdom of Judah existed by ca. 850 BCE.[68][69] The Kingdom of Israel
iwas
ithe more prosperous of the two kingdoms and soon developed into a regional
ipower;[70] during the days of the Omride dynasty, it controlled Samaria,
iGalilee, the upper Jordan Valley, the Sharon and large parts of the
iTransjordan.[71] Samaria, the capital, was home to one of the largest Iron
iAge
istructures in the Levant.[72][73]
i
iThe Kingdom of Israel was destroyed around 720 BCE, when it was conquered by
ithe Neo-Assyrian Empire.[19] The Kingdom of Judah, with its capital in
iJerusalem, later became a client state of first the Neo-Assyrian Empire and
ithen the Neo-Babylonian Empire. It is estimated that the region's population
iwas around 400,000 in the Iron Age II.[74] In 587/6 BCE, following a revolt
iin
iJudah, King Nebuchadnezzar II besieged and destroyed Jerusalem and Solomon's
iTemple,[75][76] dissolved the kingdom and exiled much of the Judean elite to
iBabylon, beginning the Babylonian captivity.[77] The defeat was also recorded
iin the Babylonian Chronicles.[78][79] After capturing Babylon in 539 BCE,
iCyrus the Great, founder of the Persian Achaemenid Empire, issued a
iproclamation allowing the exiled Judean population to return to
iJudah.[80][81]
iThe returned Jewish population was permitted to self-govern and rebuild the
iTemple.
i
iThe construction of the Second Temple was completed c. 520 BCE.[80] The
iPersians ruled the region as the province of Yehud,[82] which had a
ipopulation
iof around 30,000 people in the 5th to 4th centuries BCE.[66]: 308 
i
iIn 332 BCE, Alexander the Great of Macedon conquered the region as part of
ihis campaign against the Persian Empire. After his death, the area was
icontrolled by the Ptolemaic and Seleucid empires as a part of Coele-Syria.
iOver the ensuing centuries, the Hellenization of the region led to cultural
itensions that came to a head during the reign of Antiochus IV, giving rise to
ithe Maccabean Revolt of 167 BCE. The civil unrest weakened Seleucid rule and
iin the late 2nd century the semi-autonomous Hasmonean Kingdom of Judea arose,
ieventually attaining full independence and expanding into neighboring
iregions.[83][84][85]
i
iThe Roman Republic invaded the region in 63 BCE, first taking control of
iSyria, and then intervening in the Hasmonean Civil War. The struggle between
ipro-Roman and pro-Parthian factions in Judea led to the installation of Herod
ithe Great as a dynastic vassal of Rome. In 6 CE, the area was fully annexed
ias
ithe Roman province of Judaea, a period that heralded tensions with Roman
irule,
iand led to a series of Jewish–Roman wars, resulting in widespread
idestruction.
iThe First Jewish-Roman War (66–73 CE) resulted in the destruction of
iJerusalem
iand the Second Temple and a sizable portion of the population being killed or
idisplaced.[86]
i
iA second uprising known as the Bar Kokhba revolt took place during 132–136
iCE. Initial successes allowed the Jews to form an independent state in Judea,
ibut the Romans massed large forces and brutally crushed the rebellion,
idevastating and depopulating Judea's countryside.[86][87][88][89][90]
iJerusalem was rebuilt as a Roman colony under the name of Aelia Capitolina,
iand the province of Judea was renamed Syria Palaestina.[91][92] Jews were
iexpelled from the districts surrounding Jerusalem,[93][89] and joined
icommunities in the diaspora.[94] Nevertheless, there was a continuous small
iJewish presence and Galilee became its religious center.[95][96] Jewish
icommunities also continued to reside in the southern Hebron Hills and on the
icoastal plain.[89]
i
iWith the transition of Roman rule into that of the Byzantine Empire under
iEmperor Constantine, Early Christianity displaced the more tolerant Roman
iPaganism as an external influence.[98][99] With the conversion of Constantine
iin the 4th century, the situation for the Jewish majority in Palestine
i"became
imore difficult".[94] A series of laws were passed that discriminated against
iJews and Judaism, and Jews were persecuted by both the church and the
iauthorities.[99] Many Jews had emigrated to flourishing Diaspora
icommunities,[100] while locally there was both Christian immigration and
ilocal
iconversion. By the middle of the 5th century, there was a Christian
imajority.[101][102] Towards the end of the 5th century, Samaritan revolts
ierupted, continuing until the late 6th century and resulting in a large
idecrease in the Samaritan population.[103] After the Sasanian conquest of
iJerusalem and the short-lived Jewish revolt against Heraclius in 614 CE, the
iByzantine Empire reconsolidated control of the area in 628.[104]
i
iIn 634–641 CE, the Rashidun Caliphate conquered the
iLevant.[105][106][107][108] Over the next six centuries, control of the
iregion
itransferred between the Umayyad, Abbasid, Fatimid caliphates, and
isubsequently
ithe Seljuks and Ayyubid dynasties.[109] The population of the area
idrastically
idecreased during the following several centuries, dropping from an estimated
i1
imillion during Roman and Byzantine periods to about 300,000 by the early
iOttoman period. Alongside this population decline, there was a steady process
iof Arabization and Islamization brought on by non-Muslim emigration, Muslim
iimmigration, and local conversion to Islam.[108][107][110][111] The end of
ithe
i11th century brought the Crusades, papally-sanctioned incursions of Christian
icrusaders intent on wresting Jerusalem and the Holy Land from Muslim control
iand establishing Crusader States.[112] The Ayyubids pushed back the crusaders
ibefore Muslim rule was fully restored by the Mamluk sultans of Egypt in
i1291.[113]
i
iIn 1516, the region was conquered by the Ottoman Empire and proceeded to be
iruled as a part of Ottoman Syria for the next four centuries. In 1660, a
iDruze
irevolt led to the destruction of Safed and Tiberias.[114] In the late 18th
icentury, local Arab Sheikh Zahir al-Umar created a de facto independent
iEmirate in the Galilee. Ottoman attempts to subdue the Sheikh failed, but
iafter Zahir's death the Ottomans regained control of the area. In 1799
igovernor Jazzar Pasha successfully repelled an assault on Acre by troops of
iNapoleon, prompting the French to abandon the Syrian campaign.[115] In 1834,
ia
irevolt by Palestinian Arab peasants broke out against Egyptian conscription
iand taxation policies under Muhammad Ali. Although the revolt was suppressed,
iMuhammad Ali's army retreated and Ottoman rule was restored with British
isupport in 1840.[116] Shortly after, the Tanzimat reforms were implemented
iacross the Ottoman Empire.
i
iSince the existence of the earliest Jewish diaspora, many Jews have aspired
ito return to "Zion" and the "Land of Israel",[117] though the amount of
ieffort
ithat should be spent towards such an aim was a matter of dispute.[118] During
ithe 16th century, Jewish communities struck roots in the Four Holy
iCities—Jerusalem, Tiberias, Hebron, and Safed—and in 1697, Rabbi Yehuda
iHachasid led a group of 1,500 Jews to Jerusalem.[119] In the second half of
ithe 18th century, Eastern European opponents of Hasidism, known as the
iPerushim, settled in Palestine.[120][121]
i
iThe first wave of modern Jewish migration to Ottoman-ruled Palestine, known
ias the First Aliyah, began in 1881, as Jews fled pogroms in Eastern
iEurope.[122] Although the Zionist movement already existed in practice,
iAustro-Hungarian journalist Theodor Herzl is credited with founding political
iZionism,[123] a movement that sought to establish a Jewish state in the Land
iof Israel, thus offering a solution to the so-called Jewish question of the
iEuropean states, in conformity with the goals and achievements of other
inational projects of the time.[124] In 1896, Herzl published Der Judenstaat
i(The Jewish State), offering his vision of a future Jewish state; the
ifollowing year he presided over the First Zionist Congress in Basel,
iSwitzerland.[125] The Second Aliyah (1904–14) began after the Kishinev
ipogrom;
isome 40,000 Jews settled in Palestine, although nearly half of them left
ieventually. Both the first and second waves of migrants were mainly Orthodox
iJews,[126] although the Second Aliyah included socialist groups who
iestablished the kibbutz movement.[127] Though the immigrants of the Second
iAliyah largely sought to create communal agricultural settlements, the period
isaw the establishment of Tel Aviv as the first planned Jewish town in 1909.
iThis period also saw the emergence of Jewish armed militias, the first being
iBar-Giora, a guard founded in 1907. Two years later, the larger Hashomer
iorganization was founded as its replacement.
i
iIn 1917, during World War I, British Foreign Secretary Arthur Balfour sent
ithe Balfour Declaration to Lord Rothschild, a leader of the British Jewish
icommunity, that stated that Britain intended for the creation of a Jewish
i"national home" in Palestine.[128][129]
i
iIn 1918, the Jewish Legion, a group primarily of Zionist volunteers, assisted
iin the British conquest of Palestine.[130] In 1920, after the Allies
iconquered
ithe Levant during World War I, the territory was divided between Britain and
iFrance under the mandate system, and the British-administered area which
iincluded modern day Israel was named Mandatory Palestine.[131][132][133] Arab
iopposition to British rule and Jewish immigration led to the 1920 Palestine
iriots and the formation of a Jewish militia known as the Haganah (meaning
i"The
iDefense" in Hebrew) as an outgrowth of Hashomer, from which the Irgun and
iLehi
iparamilitaries later split off.[134] In 1922, the League of Nations granted
iBritain the Mandate for Palestine under terms which included the Balfour
iDeclaration with its promise to the Jews, and with similar provisions
iregarding the Arab Palestinians.[135] The population of the area at this time
iwas predominantly Arab and Muslim, with Jews accounting for about 11%,[136]
iand Arab Christians about 9.5% of the population.[137]
i
iThe Third (1919–23) and Fourth Aliyahs (1924–29) brought an additional
i100,000 Jews to Palestine. The rise of Nazism and the increasing persecution
iof Jews in 1930s Europe led to the Fifth Aliyah, with an influx of a quarter
iof a million Jews. This was a major cause of the Arab revolt of 1936–39,
iwhich
iwas launched as a reaction to continued Jewish immigration and land
ipurchases.
iSeveral hundred Jews and British security personnel were killed, while the
iBritish Mandate authorities alongside the Zionist militias of the Haganah and
iIrgun killed 5,032 Arabs and wounded 14,760,[138][139] resulting in over ten
ipercent of the adult male Palestinian Arab population killed, wounded,
iimprisoned or exiled.[140] The British introduced restrictions on Jewish
iimmigration to Palestine with the White Paper of 1939. With countries around
ithe world turning away Jewish refugees fleeing the Holocaust, a clandestine
imovement known as Aliyah Bet was organized to bring Jews to Palestine. By the
iend of World War II, the Jewish population of Palestine had increased to 31%
iof the total population.[141]
i
iAfter World War II, the UK found itself facing a Jewish guerrilla campaign
iover Jewish immigration restrictions, as well as continued conflict with the
iArab community over limit levels. The Haganah joined Irgun and Lehi in an
iarmed struggle against British rule.[142] At the same time, hundreds of
ithousands of Jewish Holocaust survivors and refugees sought a new life far
ifrom their destroyed communities in Europe. The Haganah attempted to bring
ithese refugees to Palestine in a programme called Aliyah Bet in which tens of
ithousands of Jewish refugees attempted to enter Palestine by ship. Most of
ithe
iships were intercepted by the Royal Navy and the refugees rounded up and
iplaced in detention camps in Atlit and Cyprus by the British.[143][144]
i
iOn 22 July 1946, Irgun bombed the British administrative headquarters for
iPalestine, which was housed in the southern wing[145] of the King David Hotel
iin Jerusalem.[146][147][148] A total of 91 people of various nationalities
iwere killed and 46 were injured.[149] The hotel was the site of the
iSecretariat of the Government of Palestine and the Headquarters of the
iBritish
iArmed Forces in Mandatory Palestine and Transjordan.[149][150] The attack
iinitially had the approval of the Haganah. It was conceived as a response to
iOperation Agatha (a series of widespread raids, including one on the Jewish
iAgency, conducted by the British authorities) and was the deadliest directed
iat the British during the Mandate era.[149][150] The Jewish insurgency
icontinued throughout the rest of 1946 and 1947 despite concerted efforts by
ithe British military and Palestine Police Force to suppress it. British
iefforts to mediate a negotiated solution with Jewish and Arab representatives
ialso failed as the Jews were unwilling to accept any solution that did not
iinvolve a Jewish state and suggested a partition of Palestine into Jewish and
iArab states, while the Arabs were adamant that a Jewish state in any part of
iPalestine was unacceptable and that the only solution was a unified Palestine
iunder Arab rule. In February 1947, the British referred the Palestine issue
ito
ithe newly formed United Nations. On 15 May 1947, the General Assembly of the
iUnited Nations resolved that the United Nations Special Committee on
iPalestine
ibe created "to prepare for consideration at the next regular session of the
iAssembly a report on the question of Palestine."[151] In the Report of the
iCommittee dated 3 September 1947 to the General Assembly,[152] the majority
iof
ithe Committee in Chapter VI proposed a plan to replace the British Mandate
iwith "an independent Arab State, an independent Jewish State, and the City of
iJerusalem [...] the last to be under an International Trusteeship
iSystem."[153] Meanwhile, the Jewish insurgency continued and peaked in July
i1947, with a series of widespread guerrilla raids culminating in the
iSergeants
iaffair, in which the Irgun took two British sergeants hostage as attempted
ileverage against the planned execution of three Irgun operatives. Irgun
ikilled
ithe officers after the executions were carried out.
i
iIn September 1947, the British cabinet decided that the Mandate was no longer
itenable, and to evacuate Palestine. According to Colonial Secretary Arthur
iCreech Jones, four major factors led to the decision to evacuate Palestine:
ithe inflexibility of Jewish and Arab negotiators who were unwilling to
icompromise on their core positions over the question of a Jewish state in
iPalestine, the economic pressure that stationing a large garrison in
iPalestine
ito deal with the Jewish insurgency and the possibility of a wider Jewish
irebellion and the possibility of an Arab rebellion put on a British economy
ialready strained by World War II, the "deadly blow to British patience and
ipride" caused by the hangings of the sergeants, and the mounting criticism
ithe
igovernment faced in failing to find a new policy for Palestine in place of
ithe
iWhite Paper of 1939.[154]
i
iOn 29 November 1947, the General Assembly adopted Resolution 181 (II)
irecommending the adoption and implementation of the Plan of Partition with
iEconomic Union.[155] The plan attached to the resolution was essentially that
iproposed by the majority of the Committee in the report of 3 September. The
iJewish Agency, which was the recognized representative of the Jewish
icommunity, accepted the plan, which assigned to Jews – a third of the
ipopulation owning less than 7% of the land – 55–56% of Mandatory
iPalestine.[156][157][158][159] The Arab League and Arab Higher Committee of
iPalestine rejected it,[160] and indicated that they would reject any other
iplan of partition.[161][162] On 1 December 1947, the Arab Higher Committee
iproclaimed a three-day strike, and riots broke out in Jerusalem.[163] The
isituation spiraled into a civil war; just two weeks after the UN vote,
iColonial Secretary Arthur Creech Jones announced that the British Mandate
iwould end on 15 May 1948, at which point the British would evacuate. As Arab
imilitias and gangs attacked Jewish areas, they were faced mainly by the
iHaganah, as well as the smaller Irgun and Lehi. In April 1948, the Haganah
imoved onto the offensive.[164][165] During this period 250,000 Palestinian
iArabs fled or were expelled, due to a number of factors.[166]
i
iOn 14 May 1948, the day before the expiration of the British Mandate, David
iBen-Gurion, the head of the Jewish Agency, declared "the establishment of a
iJewish state in Eretz-Israel, to be known as the State of Israel."[167][168]
iThe only reference in the text of the Declaration to the borders of the new
istate is the use of the term Eretz-Israel ("Land of Israel").[169] The
ifollowing day, the armies of four Arab countries—Egypt, Syria, Transjordan
iand
iIraq—entered into parts of what had been British Mandatory Palestine,
ilaunching the 1948 Arab–Israeli War;[170][171][172] contingents from Yemen,
iMorocco, Saudi Arabia and Sudan joined the war.[173][174] The apparent
ipurpose
iof the invasion was to prevent the establishment of the Jewish state at
iinception, and some Arab leaders talked about "driving the Jews into the
isea".[175][159][176] According to Benny Morris, Jews were worried that the
iinvading Arab armies held the intent to slaughter them.[177] The Arab league
istated the invasion was to restore law and order and to prevent further
ibloodshed.[178]
i
iAfter a year of fighting, a ceasefire was declared and temporary borders,
iknown as the Green Line, were established.[179] Jordan annexed what became
iknown as the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and Egypt occupied the Gaza
iStrip. The UN estimated that more than 700,000 Palestinians were expelled by
ior fled from advancing Israeli forces during the conflict—what would become
iknown in Arabic as the Nakba ("catastrophe").[180] Some 156,000 remained and
ibecame Arab citizens of Israel.[181]
i
iIsrael was admitted as a member of the UN by majority vote on 11 May
i1949.[182] An Israeli-Jordanian attempt at negotiating a peace agreement
ibroke
idown after the British government, fearful of the Egyptian reaction to such a
itreaty, expressed their opposition to the Jordanian government.[183] In the
iearly years of the state, the Labor Zionist movement led by Prime Minister
iDavid Ben-Gurion dominated Israeli politics.[184][185]
i
iImmigration to Israel during the late 1940s and early 1950s was aided by the
iIsraeli Immigration Department and the non-government sponsored Mossad
iLeAliyah Bet (lit. "Institute for Immigration B") which organized illegal and
iclandestine immigration.[186] Both groups facilitated regular immigration
ilogistics like arranging transportation, but the latter also engaged in
iclandestine operations in countries, particularly in the Middle East and
iEastern Europe, where the lives of Jews were believed to be in danger and
iexit
ifrom those places was difficult. Mossad LeAliyah Bet was disbanded in
i1953.[187] The immigration was in accordance with the One Million Plan. The
iimmigrants came for differing reasons: some held Zionist beliefs or came for
ithe promise of a better life in Israel, while others moved to escape
ipersecution or were expelled.[188][189]
i
iAn influx of Holocaust survivors and Jews from Arab and Muslim countries to
iIsrael during the first three years increased the number of Jews from 700,000
ito 1,400,000. By 1958, the population of Israel rose to two million.[190]
iBetween 1948 and 1970, approximately 1,150,000 Jewish refugees relocated to
iIsrael.[191] Some new immigrants arrived as refugees with no possessions and
iwere housed in temporary camps known as ma'abarot; by 1952, over 200,000
ipeople were living in these tent cities.[192] Jews of European background
iwere
ioften treated more favorably than Jews from Middle Eastern and North African
icountries—housing units reserved for the latter were often re-designated for
ithe former, with the result that Jews newly arrived from Arab lands generally
iended up staying in transit camps for longer.[193][194] During this period,
ifood, clothes and furniture had to be rationed in what became known as the
iausterity period. The need to solve the crisis led Ben-Gurion to sign a
ireparations agreement with West Germany that triggered mass protests by Jews
iangered at the idea that Israel could accept monetary compensation for the
iHolocaust.[195]
i
iDuring the 1950s, Israel was frequently attacked by Palestinian fedayeen,
inearly always against civilians,[196] mainly from the Egyptian-occupied Gaza
iStrip,[197] leading to several Israeli reprisal operations. In 1956, the
iUnited Kingdom and France aimed at regaining control of the Suez Canal, which
ithe Egyptians had nationalized. The continued blockade of the Suez Canal and
iStraits of Tiran to Israeli shipping, together with the growing amount of
iFedayeen attacks against Israel's southern population, and recent Arab grave
iand threatening statements, prompted Israel to attack Egypt.[198][199][200]
iIsrael joined a secret alliance with the United Kingdom and France and
ioverran
ithe Sinai Peninsula but was pressured to withdraw by the UN in return for
iguarantees of Israeli shipping rights in the Red Sea via the Straits of Tiran
iand the Canal.[201][202][203] The war, known as the Suez Crisis, resulted in
isignificant reduction of Israeli border infiltration.[204]
i
iIn the early 1960s, Israel captured Nazi war criminal Adolf Eichmann in
iArgentina and brought him to Israel for trial.[205] The trial had a major
iimpact on public awareness of the Holocaust.[206] Eichmann remains the only
iperson executed in Israel by conviction in an Israeli civilian court.[207]
iDuring the spring and summer of 1963 Israel was engaged in a diplomatic
istandoff with the United States due to the Israeli nuclear
iprogramme.[208][209]
i
iSince 1964, Arab countries, concerned over Israeli plans to divert waters of
ithe Jordan River into the coastal plain,[210] had been trying to divert the
iheadwaters to deprive Israel of water resources, provoking tensions between
iIsrael on the one hand, and Syria and Lebanon on the other. Arab nationalists
iled by Egyptian President Gamal Abdel Nasser refused to recognize Israel and
icalled for its destruction.[211][212][213] By 1966, Israeli-Arab relations
ihad
ideteriorated to the point of actual battles taking place between Israeli and
iArab forces.[214]
i
iIn May 1967, Egypt massed its army near the border with Israel, expelled UN
ipeacekeepers, stationed in the Sinai Peninsula since 1957, and blocked
iIsrael's access to the Red Sea.[215][216][217] Other Arab states mobilized
itheir forces.[218] Israel reiterated that these actions were a casus belli
iand, on 5 June, launched a pre-emptive strike against Egypt. Jordan, Syria
iand
iIraq responded and attacked Israel. In a Six-Day War, Israel captured and
ioccupied the West Bank from Jordan, the Gaza Strip and Sinai Peninsula from
iEgypt, and the Golan Heights from Syria.[219] Jerusalem's boundaries were
ienlarged, incorporating East Jerusalem, and the 1949 Green Line became the
iadministrative boundary between Israel and the occupied territories.[citation
ineeded]
i
iFollowing the 1967 war and the "Three Nos" resolution of the Arab League,
iIsrael faced attacks from the Egyptians in the Sinai Peninsula during the
i1967–1970 War of Attrition, and from Palestinian groups targeting Israelis in
ithe occupied territories, in Israel proper, and around the world. Most
iimportant among the various Palestinian and Arab groups was the Palestinian
iLiberation Organization (PLO), established in 1964, which initially committed
iitself to "armed struggle as the only way to liberate the homeland".[220] In
ithe late 1960s and early 1970s, Palestinian groups launched a wave of
iattacks[221][222] against Israeli and Jewish targets around the world,[223]
iincluding a massacre of Israeli athletes at the 1972 Summer Olympics in
iMunich. The Israeli government responded with an assassination campaign
iagainst the organizers of the massacre, a bombing and a raid on the PLO
iheadquarters in Lebanon.
i
iOn 6 October 1973, as Jews were observing Yom Kippur, the Egyptian and Syrian
iarmies launched a surprise attack against Israeli forces in the Sinai
iPeninsula and Golan Heights, that opened the Yom Kippur War. The war ended on
i25 October with Israel successfully repelling Egyptian and Syrian forces but
ihaving suffered over 2,500 soldiers killed in a war which collectively took
i10–35,000 lives in about 20 days.[224] An internal inquiry exonerated the
igovernment of responsibility for failures before and during the war, but
ipublic anger forced Prime Minister Golda Meir to resign.[225][better source
ineeded] In July 1976, an airliner was hijacked during its flight from Israel
ito France by Palestinian guerrillas and landed at Entebbe International
iAirport, Uganda. Israeli commandos carried out an operation in which 102 out
iof 106 Israeli hostages were successfully rescued.
i
iThe 1977 Knesset elections marked a major turning point in Israeli political
ihistory as Menachem Begin's Likud party took control from the Labor Party.[fn
i7] Later that year, Egyptian President Anwar El Sadat made a trip to Israel
iand spoke before the Knesset in what was the first recognition of Israel by
ian
iArab head of state.[227] In the two years that followed, Sadat and Begin
isigned the Camp David Accords (1978) and the Egypt–Israel peace treaty
i(1979).[228] In return, Israel withdrew from the Sinai Peninsula and agreed
ito
ienter negotiations over an autonomy for Palestinians in the West Bank and the
iGaza Strip.[228]
i
iOn 11 March 1978, a PLO guerilla raid from Lebanon led to the Coastal Road
imassacre. Israel responded by launching an invasion of southern Lebanon to
idestroy the PLO bases south of the Litani River. Most PLO fighters withdrew,
ibut Israel was able to secure southern Lebanon until a UN force and the
iLebanese army could take over. The PLO soon resumed its policy of attacks
iagainst Israel. In the next few years, the PLO infiltrated the south and kept
iup a sporadic shelling across the border. Israel carried out numerous
iretaliatory attacks by air and on the ground.
i
iMeanwhile, Begin's government provided incentives for Israelis to settle in
ithe occupied West Bank, increasing friction with the Palestinians in that
iarea.[230] The Basic Law: Jerusalem, Capital of Israel, passed in 1980, was
ibelieved by some to reaffirm Israel's 1967 annexation of Jerusalem by
igovernment decree, and reignited international controversy over the status of
ithe city. No Israeli legislation has defined the territory of Israel and no
iact specifically included East Jerusalem therein.[231] In 1981 Israel
ieffectively annexed the Golan Heights, although annexation was not recognized
iinternationally.[232] The international community largely rejected these
imoves, with the UN Security Council declaring both the Jerusalem Law and the
iGolan Heights Law null and void.[233][234] Israel's population diversity
iexpanded in the 1980s and 1990s. Several waves of Ethiopian Jews immigrated
ito
iIsrael since the 1980s, while between 1990 and 1994, immigration from the
ipost-Soviet states increased Israel's population by twelve percent.[235]
i
iOn 7 June 1981, during the Iran–Iraq War, the Israeli air force destroyed
iIraq's sole nuclear reactor under construction just outside Baghdad, in order
ito impede Iraq's nuclear weapons programme. Following a series of PLO attacks
iin 1982, Israel invaded Lebanon that year to destroy the bases from which the
iPLO launched attacks and missiles into northern Israel.[236] In the first six
idays of fighting, the Israelis destroyed the military forces of the PLO in
iLebanon and decisively defeated the Syrians. An Israeli government
iinquiry—the
iKahan Commission—would later hold Begin and several Israeli generals as
iindirectly responsible for the Sabra and Shatila massacre and hold Defense
iminister Ariel Sharon as bearing "personal responsibility" for the
imassacre.[237] Sharon was forced to resign as Defense Minister.[238] In 1985,
iIsrael responded to a Palestinian terrorist attack in Cyprus by bombing the
iPLO headquarters in Tunisia. Israel withdrew from most of Lebanon in 1986,
ibut
imaintained a borderland buffer zone in southern Lebanon until 2000, from
iwhere
iIsraeli forces engaged in conflict with Hezbollah. The First Intifada, a
iPalestinian uprising against Israeli rule,[239] broke out in 1987, with waves
iof uncoordinated demonstrations and violence occurring in the occupied West
iBank and Gaza. Over the following six years, the Intifada became more
iorganized and included economic and cultural measures aimed at disrupting the
iIsraeli occupation. More than a thousand people were killed in the
iviolence.[240] During the 1991 Gulf War, the PLO supported Saddam Hussein and
iIraqi Scud missile attacks against Israel. Despite public outrage, Israel
iheeded American calls to refrain from hitting back and did not participate in
ithat war.[241][242]
i
iIn 1992, Yitzhak Rabin became prime minister following an election in which
ihis party called for compromise with Israel's neighbours.[243][244] The
ifollowing year, Shimon Peres on behalf of Israel, and Mahmoud Abbas for the
iPLO, signed the Oslo Accords, which gave the Palestinian National Authority
ithe right to govern parts of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip.[245] The PLO
ialso recognized Israel's right to exist and pledged an end to
iterrorism.[246][better source needed] In 1994, the Israel–Jordan peace treaty
iwas signed, making Jordan the second Arab country to normalize relations with
iIsrael.[247] Arab public support for the Accords was damaged by the
icontinuation of Israeli settlements[248] and checkpoints, and the
ideterioration of economic conditions.[249] Israeli public support for the
iAccords waned as Israel was struck by Palestinian suicide attacks.[250] In
iNovember 1995, Yitzhak Rabin was assassinated as he left a peace rally by
iYigal Amir, a far-right Jew who opposed the Accords.[251]
i
iDuring Benjamin Netanyahu's premiership at the end of the 1990s, Israel
iagreed to withdraw from Hebron,[252] though this was never ratified or
iimplemented,[253] and signed the Wye River Memorandum, giving greater control
ito the Palestinian National Authority.[254] Ehud Barak, elected Prime
iMinister
iin 1999, began the new millennium by withdrawing forces from Southern Lebanon
iand conducting negotiations with Palestinian Authority Chairman Yasser Arafat
iand U.S. President Bill Clinton at the 2000 Camp David Summit. During the
isummit, Barak offered a plan for the establishment of a Palestinian state.
iThe
iproposed state included the entirety of the Gaza Strip and over 90% of the
iWest Bank with Jerusalem as a shared capital.[255] Each side blamed the other
ifor the failure of the talks.
i
iIn late 2000, after a controversial visit by Likud leader Ariel Sharon to the
iTemple Mount, the Second Intifada began. It would continue for the next four
iand a half years. Suicide bombings were a recurrant feature of the Intifada,
icausing Israeli civilian life to become a battlefield.[256] Some commentators
icontend that the Intifada was pre-planned by Arafat due to the collapse of
ipeace talks.[257][258][259][260] Sharon became prime minister in a 2001
ispecial election. During his tenure, Sharon carried out his plan to
iunilaterally withdraw from the Gaza Strip and also spearheaded the
iconstruction of the Israeli West Bank barrier,[261] ending the
iIntifada.[262][263] Between 2000 and 2008, 1,063 Israelis, 5,517 Palestinians
iand 64 foreign citizens had been killed.[264]
i
iIn 2006, a Hezbollah artillery assault on Israel's northern border
icommunities and a cross-border abduction of two Israeli soldiers precipitated
ithe month-long Second Lebanon War.[265][266] In 2007, the Israeli Air Force
idestroyed a nuclear reactor in Syria. In 2008, Israel entered another
iconflict
ias a ceasefire between Hamas and Israel collapsed. The 2008–2009 Gaza War
ilasted three weeks and ended after Israel announced a unilateral
iceasefire.[267][268] Hamas announced its own ceasefire, with its own
iconditions of complete withdrawal and opening of border crossings. Despite
ineither the rocket launchings nor Israeli retaliatory strikes having
icompletely stopped, the fragile ceasefire remained in order.[269] In what
iIsrael described as a response to more than a hundred Palestinian rocket
iattacks on southern Israeli cities,[270] Israel began an operation in the
iGaza
iStrip in 2012, lasting eight days.[271] Israel started another operation in
iGaza following an escalation of rocket attacks by Hamas in July 2014.[272] In
iMay 2021, another round of fighting took place in Gaza and Israel, lasting
ieleven days.[273]
i
iBy the 2010s, the increasing regional cooperation between Israel and Arab
iLeague countries have been established, culminating in the signing of the
iAbraham Accords. The Israeli security situation shifted from the traditional
iArab–Israeli conflict towards the Iran–Israel proxy conflict and direct
iconfrontation with Iran during the Syrian civil war.
i
i===== Geography and environment =====
i
iIsrael is located in the Levant area of the Fertile Crescent region. The
icountry is at the eastern end of the Mediterranean Sea, bounded by Lebanon to
ithe north, Syria to the northeast, Jordan and the West Bank to the east, and
iEgypt and the Gaza Strip to the southwest. It lies between latitudes 29° and
i34° N, and longitudes 34° and 36° E.
i
iThe sovereign territory of Israel (according to the demarcation lines of the
i1949 Armistice Agreements and excluding all territories captured by Israel
iduring the 1967 Six-Day War) is approximately 20,770 square kilometers (8,019
isq mi) in area, of which two percent is water.[274] However Israel is so
inarrow (100 km at its widest, compared to 400 km from north to south) that
ithe
iexclusive economic zone in the Mediterranean is double the land area of the
icountry.[275] The total area under Israeli law, including East Jerusalem and
ithe Golan Heights, is 22,072 square kilometers (8,522 sq mi),[276] and the
itotal area under Israeli control, including the military-controlled and
ipartially Palestinian-governed territory of the West Bank, is 27,799 square
ikilometers (10,733 sq mi).[277]
i
iDespite its small size, Israel is home to a variety of geographic features,
ifrom the Negev desert in the south to the inland fertile Jezreel Valley,
imountain ranges of the Galilee, Carmel and toward the Golan in the north. The
iIsraeli coastal plain on the shores of the Mediterranean is home to most of
ithe nation's population.[278] East of the central highlands lies the Jordan
iRift Valley, which forms a small part of the 6,500-kilometer (4,039 mi) Great
iRift Valley. The Jordan River runs along the Jordan Rift Valley, from Mount
iHermon through the Hulah Valley and the Sea of Galilee to the Dead Sea, the
ilowest point on the surface of the Earth.[279] Further south is the Arabah,
iending with the Gulf of Eilat, part of the Red Sea. Makhtesh, or "erosion
icirques" are unique to the Negev and the Sinai Peninsula, the largest being
ithe Makhtesh Ramon at 38 km in length.[280] A report on the environmental
istatus of the Mediterranean Basin states that Israel has the largest number
iof
iplant species per square meter of all the countries in the basin.[281] Israel
icontains four terrestrial ecoregions: Eastern Mediterranean
iconifer-sclerophyllous-broadleaf forests, Southern Anatolian montane conifer
iand deciduous forests, Arabian Desert, and Mesopotamian shrub desert.[282] It
ihad a 2019 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 4.14/10, ranking it
i135th globally out of 172 countries.[283]
i
iThe Jordan Rift Valley is the result of tectonic movements within the Dead
iSea Transform (DSF) fault system. The DSF forms the transform boundary
ibetween
ithe African Plate to the west and the Arabian Plate to the east. The Golan
iHeights and all of Jordan are part of the Arabian Plate, while the Galilee,
iWest Bank, Coastal Plain, and Negev along with the Sinai Peninsula are on the
iAfrican Plate. This tectonic disposition leads to a relatively high seismic
iactivity in the region. The entire Jordan Valley segment is thought to have
iruptured repeatedly, for instance during the last two major earthquakes along
ithis structure in 749 and 1033. The deficit in slip that has built up since
ithe 1033 event is sufficient to cause an earthquake of Mw ~7.4.[284]
i
iThe most catastrophic known earthquakes occurred in 31 BCE, 363, 749, and
i1033 CE, that is every ca. 400 years on average.[285] Destructive earthquakes
ileading to serious loss of life strike about every 80 years.[286] While
istringent construction regulations are currently in place and recently built
istructures are earthquake-safe, as of 2007[update] the majority of the
ibuildings in Israel were older than these regulations and many public
ibuildings as well as 50,000 residential buildings did not meet the new
istandards and were "expected to collapse" if exposed to a strong
iearthquake.[286]
i
iTemperatures in Israel vary widely, especially during the winter. Coastal
iareas, such as those of Tel Aviv and Haifa, have a typical Mediterranean
iclimate with cool, rainy winters and long, hot summers. The area of Beersheba
iand the Northern Negev have a semi-arid climate with hot summers, cool
iwinters, and fewer rainy days than the Mediterranean climate. The Southern
iNegev and the Arava areas have a desert climate with very hot, dry summers,
iand mild winters with few days of rain. The highest temperature in the world
ioutside Africa and North America as of 2021[update], 54 °C (129 °F), was
irecorded in 1942 in the Tirat Zvi kibbutz in the northern Jordan River
ivalley.[287][288]
i
iAt the other extreme, mountainous regions can be windy and cold, and areas at
ielevation of 750 metres (2,460 ft) or more (same elevation as Jerusalem) will
iusually receive at least one snowfall each year.[289] From May to September,
irain in Israel is rare.[290][291] With scarce water resources, Israel has
ideveloped various water-saving technologies, including drip
iirrigation.[292][better source needed] Israelis also take advantage of the
iconsiderable sunlight available for solar energy, making Israel the leading
ination in solar energy use per capita—practically every house uses solar
ipanels for water heating.[293]
i
iThere are four different phytogeographic regions in Israel, due to the
icountry's location between the temperate and tropical zones, bordering the
iMediterranean Sea in the west and the desert in the east. For this reason,
ithe
iflora and fauna of Israel are extremely diverse. There are 2,867 known
ispecies
iof plants found in Israel. Of these, at least 253 species are introduced and
inon-native.[294] There are 380 Israeli nature reserves.[295]
i
iThe Israeli Ministry of Environmental Protection has reported that climate
ichange "will have a decisive impact on all areas of life, including: water,
ipublic health, agriculture, energy, biodiversity, coastal infrastructure,
ieconomics, nature, national security, and geostrategy", and will have the
igreatest effect on vulnerable populations such as the poor, the elderly, and
ithe chronically ill.[296]
i
i===== Demographics =====
i
iAs of 31 December 2022[update], Israel's population was an estimated
i9,656,000. In 2022, the civil government recorded 73.6% of the population as
iJews, 21.1% of the population as Arabs, and 5.3% as "Others" (non-Arab
iChristians and people who have no religion listed).[11] Over the last decade,
ilarge numbers of migrant workers from Romania, Thailand, China, Africa, and
iSouth America have settled in Israel. Exact figures are unknown, as many of
ithem are living in the country illegally,[297] but estimates run from 166,000
ito 203,000.[298] By June 2012, approximately 60,000 African migrants had
ientered Israel.[299] About 93% of Israelis live in urban areas.[300] 90% of
iPalestinian Israelis reside in 139 densely populated towns and villages
iconcentrated in the Galilee, Triangle and Negev regions, with the remaining
i10% in mixed cities and neighbourhoods.[301][302][303][304][305] Data
ipublished by the OECD in 2016 estimated the average life expectancy of
iIsraelis at 82.5 years, making it the 6th-highest in the world.[306] Israeli
iArab life expectancy lags behind by 3 to 4 years,[307][308] still higher than
ialmost every majority Arab or Muslim country in the world.[309][dead
ilink][310]
i
iIsrael was established as a homeland for the Jewish people and is often
ireferred to as a Jewish state. The country's Law of Return grants all Jews
iand
ithose of Jewish ancestry the right to Israeli citizenship.[311] Retention of
iIsrael's population since 1948 is about even or greater, when compared to
iother countries with mass immigration.[312] Jewish emigration from Israel
i(called yerida in Hebrew), primarily to the United States and Canada, is
idescribed by demographers as modest,[313] but is often cited by Israeli
igovernment ministries as a major threat to Israel's future.[314][315]
i
iApproximately 80% of Israeli Jews are born in Israel, 14% are immigrants from
iEurope and the Americas, and 6% are immigrants from Asia and Africa.[316]
iJews
ifrom Europe and the former Soviet Union and their descendants born in Israel,
iincluding Ashkenazi Jews, constitute approximately 50% of Jewish Israelis.
iJews who left or fled Arab and Muslim countries and their descendants,
iincluding both Mizrahi and Sephardi Jews,[317] form most of the rest of the
iJewish population.[318][319] Jewish intermarriage rates run at over 35% and
irecent studies suggest that the percentage of Israelis descended from both
iSephardi and Ashkenazi Jews increases by 0.5 percent every year, with over
i25%
iof school children now originating from both communities.[320] Around 4% of
iIsraelis (300,000), ethnically defined as "others", are Russian descendants
iof
iJewish origin or family who are not Jewish according to rabbinical law, but
iwere eligible for Israeli citizenship under the Law of Return.[321][322][323]
i
iThe total number of Israeli settlers beyond the Green Line is over 600,000
i(≈10% of the Jewish Israeli population).[324] In 2016[update], 399,300
iIsraelis lived in West Bank settlements,[325] including those that predated
ithe establishment of the State of Israel and which were re-established after
ithe Six-Day War, in cities such as Hebron and Gush Etzion bloc. In addition
ito
ithe West Bank settlements, there were more than 200,000 Jews living in East
iJerusalem,[326] and 22,000 in the Golan Heights.[325] Approximately 7,800
iIsraelis lived in settlements in the Gaza Strip, known as Gush Katif, until
ithey were evacuated by the government as part of its 2005 disengagement
iplan.[327]
i
iIsraeli Arabs (including the Arab population of East Jerusalem and the Golan
iHeights) comprise 21.1% of the population or 1,995,000 people.[328] In a 2017
itelephone poll, 40% of Arab citizens of Israel identified as "Arab in Israel"
ior "Arab citizen of Israel", 15% identified as "Palestinian", 8.9% as
i"Palestinian in Israel" or "Palestinian citizen of Israel", and 8.7% as
i"Arab"; 60% of Israeli Arabs have a positive view of the state.[329][330]
iAccording to Sammy Smooha, "The identity of 83.0% of the Arabs in 2019 (up
ifrom 75.5% in 2017) has an Israeli component and 61.9% (unchanged from 60.3%)
ihas a Palestinian component. However, when these two components were
ipresented
ias competitors, 69.0% of the Arabs in 2019 chose exclusive or primary
iPalestinian identity, compared with 29.8% who chose exclusive or primary
iIsraeli Arab identity."[331]
i
iIsrael has four major metropolitan areas: Gush Dan (Tel Aviv metropolitan
iarea; population 3,854,000), Jerusalem metropolitan area (population
i1,253,900), Haifa metropolitan area (population 924,400), and Beersheba
imetropolitan area (population 377,100).[332]
i
iIsrael's largest municipality, in population and area, is Jerusalem with
i966,210 residents in an area of 125 square kilometres (48 sq mi).[333]
iIsraeli
igovernment statistics on Jerusalem include the population and area of East
iJerusalem, which is widely recognized as part of the Palestinian territories
iunder Israeli occupation.[334] Tel Aviv and Haifa rank as Israel's next most
ipopulous cities, with populations of 467,875 and 282,832, respectively.[333]
iThe (mainly Haredi) city of Bnei Brak is the most densely populated city in
iIsrael and one of the 10 most densely populated cities in the world.[335]
i
iIsrael has 16 cities with populations over 100,000. In all, there are 77
iIsraeli localities granted "municipalities" (or "city") status by the
iMinistry
iof the Interior,[336] four of which are in the West Bank.[337] Two more
icities
iare planned: Kasif, a planned city to be built in the Negev, and Harish,
ioriginally a small town that is being built into a large city since
i2015.[338]
i
i^a This number includes East Jerusalem and West Bank areas, which had a total
ipopulation of 573,330 inhabitants in 2019.[339] Israeli sovereignty over East
iJerusalem is internationally unrecognized.
i
iIsrael's sole official language is Hebrew. Until 2018, Arabic was also one of
itwo official languages of the State of Israel;[8] in 2018 it was downgraded
ito
ihaving a 'special status in the state' with its use by state institutions to
ibe set in law.[9][10] Hebrew is the primary language of the state and is
ispoken every day by the majority of the population. Arabic is spoken by the
iArab minority, with Hebrew taught in Arab schools.
i
iAs a country of immigrants, many languages can be heard on the streets. Due
ito mass immigration from the former Soviet Union and Ethiopia (some 130,000
iEthiopian Jews live in Israel),[340][341] Russian and Amharic are widely
ispoken.[342] More than one million Russian-speaking immigrants arrived in
iIsrael from the post-Soviet states between 1990 and 2004.[343] French is
ispoken by around 700,000 Israelis,[344] mostly originating from France and
iNorth Africa (see Maghrebi Jews). English was an official language during the
iMandate period; it lost this status after the establishment of Israel, but
iretains a role comparable to that of an official language,[345][346][347] as
imay be seen in road signs and official documents. Many Israelis communicate
ireasonably well in English, as many television programmes are broadcast in
iEnglish with subtitles and the language is taught from the early grades in
ielementary school. In addition, Israeli universities offer courses in the
iEnglish language on various subjects.[348][better source needed]
i
iIsrael comprises a major part of the Holy Land, a region of significant
iimportance to all Abrahamic religions, including Judaism, Christianity,
iIslam,
iSamaritanism, the Druze Faith and the Baháʼí Faith.
i
iThe religious affiliation of Israeli Jews varies widely: a social survey from
i2016 made by Pew Research indicates that 49% self-identify as Hiloni
i(secular), 29% as Masorti (traditional), 13% as Dati (religious) and 9% as
iHaredi (ultra-Orthodox).[350] Haredi Jews are expected to represent more than
i20% of Israel's Jewish population by 2028.[351]
i
iMuslims constitute Israel's largest religious minority, making up about 17.6%
iof the population. About 2% of the population is Christian and 1.6% is
iDruze.[274] The Christian population is composed primarily of Arab Christians
iand Aramean Christians, but also includes post-Soviet immigrants, the foreign
ilaborers of multinational origins, and followers of Messianic Judaism,
iconsidered by most Christians and Jews to be a form of Christianity.[352]
iMembers of many other religious groups, including Buddhists and Hindus,
imaintain a presence in Israel, albeit in small numbers.[353] Out of more than
ione million immigrants from the former Soviet Union, about 300,000 are
iconsidered not Jewish by the Chief Rabbinate of Israel.[354]
i
iThe city of Jerusalem is of special importance to Jews, Muslims, and
iChristians, as it is the home of sites that are pivotal to their religious
ibeliefs, such as the Old City that incorporates the Western Wall and the
iTemple Mount (Al-Aqsa Mosque compound) and the Church of the Holy
iSepulchre.[355] Other locations of religious importance in Israel are
iNazareth
i(holy in Christianity as the site of the Annunciation of Mary), Tiberias and
iSafed (two of the Four Holy Cities in Judaism), the White Mosque in Ramla
i(holy in Islam as the shrine of the prophet Saleh), and the Church of Saint
iGeorge and Mosque of Al-Khadr, Lod (holy in Christianity and Islam as the
itomb
iof Saint George or Al Khidr). A number of other religious landmarks are
ilocated in the West Bank, among them Joseph's Tomb in Nablus, the birthplace
iof Jesus and Rachel's Tomb in Bethlehem, and the Cave of the Patriarchs in
iHebron. The administrative center of the Baháʼí Faith and the Shrine of the
iBáb are located at the Baháʼí World Centre in Haifa; the leader of the faith
iis buried in Acre.[356][357][358] A few kilometres south of the Baháʼí World
iCentre is Mahmood Mosque affiliated with the reformist Ahmadiyya movement.
iKababir, Haifa's mixed neighbourhood of Jews and Ahmadi Arabs is one of a few
iof its kind in the country, others being Jaffa, Acre, other Haifa
ineighbourhoods, Harish and Upper Nazareth.[359][360]
i
iEducation is highly valued in the Israeli culture and was viewed as a
ifundamental block of ancient Israelites.[361] Jewish communities in the
iLevant
iwere the first to introduce compulsory education for which the organized
icommunity, not less than the parents was responsible.[362] Many international
ibusiness leaders such as Microsoft founder Bill Gates have praised Israel for
iits high quality of education in helping spur Israel's economic development
iand technological boom.[363][364][365] In 2015, the country ranked third
iamong
iOECD members (after Canada and Japan) for the percentage of 25–64 year-olds
ithat have attained tertiary education with 49% compared with the OECD average
iof 35%.[366] In 2012, the country ranked third in the world in the number of
iacademic degrees per capita (20 percent of the population).[367]
i
iIsrael has a school life expectancy of 16 years and a literacy rate of
i97.8%.[274] The State Education Law, passed in 1953, established five types
iof
ischools: state secular, state religious, ultra orthodox, communal settlement
ischools, and Arab schools. The public secular is the largest school group,
iand
iis attended by the majority of Jewish and non-Arab pupils in Israel. Most
iArabs send their children to schools where Arabic is the language of
iinstruction.[368] Education is compulsory in Israel for children between the
iages of three and eighteen.[369] Schooling is divided into three tiers –
iprimary school (grades 1–6), middle school (grades 7–9), and high school
i(grades 10–12) – culminating with Bagrut matriculation exams. Proficiency in
icore subjects such as mathematics, the Hebrew language, Hebrew and general
iliterature, the English language, history, Biblical scripture and civics is
inecessary to receive a Bagrut certificate.[370]
i
iIsrael's Jewish population maintains a relatively high level of educational
iattainment where just under half of all Israeli Jews (46%) hold
ipost-secondary
idegrees. This figure has remained stable in their already high levels of
ieducational attainment over recent generations.[371][372] Israeli Jews (among
ithose ages 25 and older) have average of 11.6 years of schooling making them
ione of the most highly educated of all major religious groups in the
iworld.[373][374] In Arab, Christian and Druze schools, the exam on Biblical
istudies is replaced by an exam on Muslim, Christian or Druze heritage.[375]
iMaariv described the Christian Arabs sectors as "the most successful in
ieducation system",[376] since Christians fared the best in terms of education
iin comparison to any other religion in Israel.[377] Israeli children from
iRussian-speaking families have a higher bagrut pass rate at high-school
ilevel.[378] Amongst immigrant children born in the former Soviet Union, the
ibagrut pass rate is higher amongst those families from European FSU states at
i62.6% and lower amongst those from Central Asian and Caucasian FSU
istates.[379] In 2014, 61.5% of all Israeli twelfth graders earned a
imatriculation certificate.[380]
i
iIsrael has a tradition of higher education where its quality university
ieducation has been largely responsible in spurring the nation's modern
ieconomic development.[381] Israel has nine public universities that are
isubsidized by the state and 49 private colleges.[370][382][383] The Hebrew
iUniversity of Jerusalem, Israel's second-oldest university after the
iTechnion,[384][385] houses the National Library of Israel, the world's
ilargest
irepository of Judaica and Hebraica.[386] The Technion and the Hebrew
iUniversity consistently ranked among world's 100 top universities by the
iprestigious ARWU academic ranking.[387] Other major universities in the
icountry include the Weizmann Institute of Science, Tel Aviv University,
iBen-Gurion University of the Negev, Bar-Ilan University, the University of
iHaifa and the Open University of Israel. Ariel University, in the West Bank,
iis the newest university institution, upgraded from college status, and the
ifirst in over thirty years.
i
i===== Government and politics =====
i
iIsrael is a parliamentary democracy with universal suffrage. A member of
iparliament supported by a parliamentary majority becomes the prime
iminister—usually this is the chair of the largest party. The prime minister
iis
ithe head of government and head of the cabinet.[388][389]
i
iIsrael is governed by a 120-member parliament, known as the Knesset.
iMembership of the Knesset is based on proportional representation of
ipolitical
iparties,[390][better source needed] with a 3.25% electoral threshold, which
iin
ipractice has resulted in coalition governments. Residents of Israeli
isettlements in the West Bank are eligible to vote[391] and after the 2015
ielection, 10 of the 120 MKs (8%) were settlers.[392] Parliamentary elections
iare scheduled every four years, but unstable coalitions or a no-confidence
ivote by the Knesset can dissolve a government earlier.[23] The first Arab-led
iparty was established in 1988[393] and as of 2022, Arab-led parties hold
iabout
i10% of the parliament's seats.[394]
i
iThe Basic Laws of Israel function as an uncodified constitution. In its Basic
iLaws, Israel defines itself as a Jewish and democratic state, and as the
ination-state of the Jewish people.[395] In 2003, the Knesset began to draft
ian
iofficial constitution based on these laws.[274][396]
i
iThe president of Israel is head of state, with limited and largely ceremonial
iduties.[388]
i
iIsrael has no official religion,[397][398][399] but the definition of the
istate as "Jewish and democratic" creates a strong connection with Judaism, as
iwell as a conflict between state law and religious law. Interaction between
ithe political parties keeps the balance between state and religion largely as
iit existed during the British Mandate.[400]
i
iOn 19 July 2018, the Knesset passed a Basic Law that characterizes the State
iof Israel as principally a "Nation State of the Jewish People", and Hebrew as
iits official language. The bill ascribes "special status" to the Arabic
ilanguage. The same bill gives Jews a unique right to national
iself-determination, and views the developing of Jewish settlement in the
icountry as "a national interest", empowering the government to "take steps to
iencourage, advance and implement this interest."[401]
i
iIsrael has a three-tier court system. At the lowest level are magistrate
icourts, situated in most cities across the country. Above them are district
icourts, serving as both appellate courts and courts of first instance; they
iare situated in five of Israel's six districts. The third and highest tier is
ithe Supreme Court, located in Jerusalem; it serves a dual role as the highest
icourt of appeals and the High Court of Justice. In the latter role, the
iSupreme Court rules as a court of first instance, allowing individuals, both
icitizens and non-citizens, to petition against the decisions of state
iauthorities.[402] Although Israel supports the goals of the International
iCriminal Court, it has not ratified the Rome Statute, citing concerns about
ithe ability of the court to remain free from political
iimpartiality.[403][better source needed]
i
iIsrael's legal system combines three legal traditions: English common law,
icivil law, and Jewish law.[274] It is based on the principle of stare decisis
i(precedent) and is an adversarial system, where the parties in the suit bring
ievidence before the court. Court cases are decided by professional judges
iwith
ino role for juries.[404][better source needed] Marriage and divorce are under
ithe jurisdiction of the religious courts: Jewish, Muslim, Druze, and
iChristian. The election of judges is carried out by a committee of two
iKnesset
imembers, three Supreme Court justices, two Israeli Bar members and two
iministers (one of which, Israel's justice minister, is the committee's
ichairman). The committee's members of the Knesset are secretly elected by the
iKnesset, and one of them is traditionally a member of the opposition; the
icommittee's Supreme Court justices are chosen by tradition from all Supreme
iCourt justices by seniority; the Israeli Bar members are elected by the bar;
iand the second minister is appointed by the Israeli cabinet. The current
ijustice minister, and the committee's chairman, is Yariv Levin.[405]
iAdministration of Israel's courts (both the "General" courts and the Labor
iCourts) is carried by the Administration of Courts, situated in Jerusalem.
iBoth General and Labor courts are paperless courts: the storage of court
ifiles, as well as court decisions, are conducted electronically. Israel's
iBasic Law: Human Dignity and Liberty seeks to defend human rights and
iliberties in Israel. As a result of "Enclave law", large portions of Israeli
icivil law are applied to Israeli settlements and Israeli residents in the
ioccupied territories.[406]
i
iThe State of Israel is divided into six main administrative districts, known
ias mehozot (Hebrew: מחוזות; singular: mahoz) – Center, Haifa, Jerusalem,
iNorth, South, and Tel Aviv districts, as well as the Judea and Samaria Area
iin
ithe West Bank. All of the Judea and Samaria Area and parts of the Jerusalem
iand Northern districts are not recognized internationally as part of Israel.
iDistricts are further divided into fifteen sub-districts known as nafot
i(Hebrew: נפות; singular: nafa), which are themselves partitioned into fifty
inatural regions.[407]
i
iIn 1967, as a result of the Six-Day War, Israel captured and occupied the
iWest Bank, including East Jerusalem, the Gaza Strip and the Golan Heights.
iIsrael also captured the Sinai Peninsula, but returned it to Egypt as part of
ithe 1979 Egypt–Israel peace treaty.[228] Between 1982 and 2000, Israel
ioccupied part of southern Lebanon, in what was known as the Security Belt.
iSince Israel's capture of these territories, Israeli settlements and military
iinstallations have been built within each of them, except Lebanon.
i
iThe Golan Heights and East Jerusalem have been fully incorporated into Israel
iunder Israeli law, but not under international law. Israel has applied
icivilian law to both areas and granted their inhabitants permanent residency
istatus and the ability to apply for citizenship. The UN Security Council has
ideclared the annexation of the Golan Heights and East Jerusalem to be "null
iand void" and continues to view the territories as occupied.[408][409] The
istatus of East Jerusalem in any future peace settlement has at times been a
idifficult issue in negotiations between Israeli governments and
irepresentatives of the Palestinians, as Israel views it as its sovereign
iterritory, as well as part of its capital.
i
iThe West Bank excluding East Jerusalem is known in Israeli law as the Judea
iand Samaria Area; the almost 400,000 Israeli settlers residing in the area
iare
iconsidered part of Israel's population, have Knesset representation, a large
ipart of Israel's civil and criminal laws applied to them, and their output is
iconsidered part of Israel's economy.[410][fn 4] The land itself is not
iconsidered part of Israel under Israeli law, as Israel has consciously
irefrained from annexing the territory, without ever relinquishing its legal
iclaim to the land or defining a border with the area.[410] There is no border
ibetween Israel-proper and the West Bank for Israeli vehicles. Israeli
ipolitical opposition to annexation is primarily due to the perceived
i"demographic threat" of incorporating the West Bank's Palestinian population
iinto Israel.[410] Outside of the Israeli settlements, the West Bank remains
iunder direct Israeli military rule, and Palestinians in the area cannot
ibecome
iIsraeli citizens. The international community maintains that Israel does not
ihave sovereignty in the West Bank, and considers Israel's control of the area
ito be the longest military occupation in modern history.[413] The West Bank
iwas occupied and annexed by Jordan in 1950, following the 1949 Armistice
iAgreements. Only Britain recognized this annexation and Jordan has since
iceded
iits claim to the territory to the PLO. The population are mainly
iPalestinians,
iincluding refugees of the 1948 Arab–Israeli War.[414] From their occupation
iin
i1967 until 1993, the Palestinians living in these territories were under
iIsraeli military administration. Since the Israel–PLO letters of recognition,
imost of the Palestinian population and cities have been under the internal
ijurisdiction of the Palestinian Authority, and only partial Israeli military
icontrol, although Israel has on several occasions redeployed its troops and
ireinstated full military administration during periods of unrest. In response
ito increasing attacks during the Second Intifada, the Israeli government
istarted to construct the Israeli West Bank barrier.[415] When completed,
iapproximately 13% of the barrier will be constructed on the Green Line or in
iIsrael with 87% inside the West Bank.[416][417]
i
iThe Gaza Strip is considered to be a "foreign territory" under Israeli law;
ihowever, since Israel operates a land, air, and sea blockade of the Gaza
iStrip, together with Egypt, the international community considers Israel to
ibe
ithe occupying power. The Gaza Strip was occupied by Egypt from 1948 to 1967
iand then by Israel after 1967. In 2005, as part of Israel's unilateral
idisengagement plan, Israel removed all of its settlers and forces from the
iterritory, however, it continues to maintain control of its airspace and
iwaters. The international community, including numerous international
ihumanitarian organizations and various bodies of the UN, consider Gaza to
iremain occupied.[418][419][420][421][422] Following the 2007 Battle of Gaza,
iwhen Hamas assumed power in the Gaza Strip,[423] Israel tightened its control
iof the Gaza crossings along its border, as well as by sea and air, and
iprevented persons from entering and exiting the area except for isolated
icases
iit deemed humanitarian.[423] Gaza has a border with Egypt, and an agreement
ibetween Israel, the European Union, and the PA governed how border crossing
iwould take place (it was monitored by European observers).[424] The
iapplication of democracy to its Palestinian citizens, and the selective
iapplication of Israeli democracy in the Israeli-controlled Palestinian
iterritories, has been criticized.[425][426]
i
iThe International Court of Justice, principal judicial organ of the UN, said,
iin its 2004 advisory opinion on the legality of the construction of the
iIsraeli West Bank barrier, that the lands captured by Israel in the Six-Day
iWar, including East Jerusalem, are occupied territory, and further found that
ithe construction of the wall within the occupied Palestinian territory to
iviolate international law.[427] Most negotiations relating to the territories
ihave been on the basis of UN Security Council Resolution 242, which
iemphasizes
i"the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by war", and calls on
iIsrael to withdraw from occupied territories in return for normalization of
irelations with Arab states, a principle known as "Land for
ipeace".[428][429][430] Israel has been criticized for engaging in systematic
iand widespread violations of human rights in the occupied territories,
iincluding the occupation itself,[431] and war crimes against
icivilians.[432][433][434][435] The allegations include violations of
iinternational humanitarian law[436] by the UN Human Rights Council,[437] The
iU.S. State Department has called reports of abuses of significant human
irights
iof Palestinians 'credible' both within Israel[438] and the occupied
iterritories.[439] Amnesty International and other NGOs have documented mass
iarbitrary arrests, torture, unlawful killings, systemic abuses and
iimpunity[440][441][442][443][444][445] in tandem with a denial of the right
ito
iPalestinian self-determination.[446][447][448][449][450] In response to such
iallegations, Prime Minister Netanyahu has defended the country's security
iforces for protecting the innocent from terrorists[451] and expressed
icontempt
ifor what he describes as a lack of concern about the human rights violations
icommitted by "criminal killers".[452] Some observers, such as Israeli
iofficials, scholars,[453] United States Ambassador to the UN Nikki
iHaley[454][455] and UN secretary-generals Ban Ki-moon[456] and Kofi
iAnnan,[457] also assert that the UN is disproportionately concerned with
iIsraeli misconduct.[excessive detail?]
i
iThe international community widely regards Israeli settlements in the
ioccupied territories illegal under international law.[458] United Nations
iSecurity Council Resolution 2334, passed on 23 December 2016 in a 14–0 vote
iby
imembers of the U.N. Security Council (UNSC) with the United States
iabstaining.
iThe resolution states that Israel's settlement activity constitutes a
i"flagrant violation" of international law, has "no legal validity" and
idemands
ithat Israel stop such activity and fulfill its obligations as an occupying
ipower under the Fourth Geneva Convention.[459] A United Nations special
irapporteur concluded that settlement program was a war crime under the Rome
iStatute,[460] and Amnesty International found that the settlement program
iconstitutes an illegal transfer of civilians into occupied territory as well
ias amounting to "pillage", which is prohibited by both the Hague Conventions
iand the Geneva Conventions as well as being a war crime under the Rome
iStatute.[461]
i
iIsrael's treatment of the Palestinians within the occupied territories has
idrawn accusations that it is guilty of the crime of apartheid by Israeli
ihuman
irights groups Yesh Din and B'tselem, and other international organizations
iincluding Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch, with the criticism
iextending to its treatment of Palestinians within Israel as well.[462][463]
iAmnesty's report was criticized by politicians and government representatives
ifrom Israel, the United States, the United Kingdom, Netherlands and Germany,
iwhile it was welcomed by Palestinians, representatives from other states, and
iorganizations such as the Arab League.[464][465][466][467][468][469] A 2021
isurvey of academic experts on the Middle East found an increase from 59%[470]
ito 65% of these scholars describing Israel as a "one-state reality akin to
iapartheid".[471] In 2022, Michael Lynk, a Canadian law professor appointed by
ithe U.N. Human Rights Council said that the situation met the legal
idefinition
iof apartheid.[472] Subsequent reports from his successor, Francesca Albanese
iand from Permanent United Nations Fact Finding Mission on the Israel
iPalestine
iconflict chair Navi Pillay echoed this opinion.[473][474] The crime of
iapartheid is a crime against humanity under the Rome Statute and the
iInternational Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of
iApartheid.[475][476]
i
iIsrael maintains diplomatic relations with 164 member states of the United
iNations, as well as with the Holy See, Kosovo, the Cook Islands and Niue. It
ihas 107 diplomatic missions around the world;[477] countries with whom they
ihave no diplomatic relations include most Muslim countries.[478] Six out of
itwenty-two nations in the Arab League have normalized relations with Israel.
iEgypt and Jordan signed peace treaties in 1979 and 1994, respectively, but
iIsrael remains formally in a state of war with Syria, a status that dates
iback
iuninterrupted to 1948. It has been in a similarly formal state of war with
iLebanon since the end of the Lebanese Civil War in 2000, with the
iIsrael–Lebanon border remaining unagreed by treaty.
i
iIn late 2020, Israel normalized relations with four more Arab countries: the
iUnited Arab Emirates and Bahrain in September (known as the Abraham
iAccords),[479] Sudan in October,[480] and Morocco in December.[481] Despite
ithe peace treaty between Israel and Egypt, Israel is still widely considered
ian enemy country among Egyptians.[482] Iran had diplomatic relations with
iIsrael under the Pahlavi dynasty[483] but withdrew its recognition of Israel
iduring the Islamic Revolution.[484] Israeli citizens may not visit Syria,
iLebanon, Iraq, Saudi Arabia, and Yemen (countries Israel fought in the 1948
iArab–Israeli War that Israel does not have a peace treaty with) without
ipermission from the Ministry of the Interior.[485] As a result of the 2008–09
iGaza War, Mauritania, Qatar, Bolivia, and Venezuela suspended political and
ieconomic ties with Israel,[486] though Bolivia renewed ties in 2019.[487]
iChina maintains good ties with both Israel and the Arab world.[488]
i
iThe United States and the Soviet Union were the first two countries to
irecognize the State of Israel, having declared recognition roughly
isimultaneously.[489] Diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union were broken
iin
i1967, following the Six-Day War, and renewed in October 1991.[490] The United
iStates regards Israel as its "most reliable partner in the Middle East",[491]
ibased on "common democratic values, religious affinities, and security
iinterests".[492] The United States has provided $68 billion in military
iassistance and $32 billion in grants to Israel since 1967, under the Foreign
iAssistance Act (period beginning 1962),[493] more than any other country for
ithat period until 2003.[493][494][495] Most surveyed Americans have also held
iconsistently favorable views of Israel.[496][497] The United Kingdom is seen
ias having a "natural" relationship with Israel on account of the Mandate for
iPalestine.[498] Relations between the two countries were also made stronger
iby
iformer prime minister Tony Blair's efforts for a two state resolution. By
i2007[update], Germany had paid 25 billion euros in reparations to the Israeli
istate and individual Israeli Holocaust survivors.[499] Israel is included in
ithe European Union's European Neighbourhood Policy (ENP), which aims at
ibringing the EU and its neighbours closer.[500]
i
iAlthough Turkey and Israel did not establish full diplomatic relations until
i1991,[501] Turkey has cooperated with the Jewish state since its recognition
iof Israel in 1949. Turkey's ties to other Muslim-majority nations in the
iregion have at times resulted in pressure from Arab and Muslim states to
itemper its relationship with Israel.[502] Relations between Turkey and Israel
itook a downturn after the 2008–09 Gaza War and Israel's raid of the Gaza
iflotilla.[503] Relations between Greece and Israel have improved since 1995
idue to the decline of Israeli–Turkish relations.[504] The two countries have
ia
idefense cooperation agreement and in 2010, the Israeli Air Force hosted
iGreece's Hellenic Air Force in a joint exercise at the Uvda base. The joint
iCyprus-Israel oil and gas explorations centered on the Leviathan gas field
iare
ian important factor for Greece, given its strong links with Cyprus.[505]
iCooperation in the world's longest subsea electric power cable, the EuroAsia
iInterconnector, has strengthened relations between Cyprus and Israel.[506]
i
iAzerbaijan is one of the few majority Muslim countries to develop strategic
iand economic relations with Israel.[507] Azerbaijan supplies the country with
ia substantial amount of its oil needs, and Israel is a critical arms supplier
ifor Azerbaijan.[507] Kazakhstan also has an economic and strategic
ipartnership
iwith Israel.[508] India established full diplomatic ties with Israel in 1992
iand has fostered a strong military, technological and cultural partnership
iwith the country since then.[509] A 2009 survey done on behalf of the Israel
iMinistry of Foreign Affairs listed India as more pro-Israel than 12 other
icountries surveyed.[510][511] India is the largest customer of the Israeli
imilitary equipment and Israel is the second-largest military partner of India
iafter Russia.[512] Ethiopia is Israel's main ally in Africa due to common
ipolitical, religious and security interests.[513] Israel provides expertise
ito
iEthiopia on irrigation projects and thousands of Ethiopian Jews live in
iIsrael.
i
iIsrael has a history of providing emergency foreign aid and humanitarian
iresponse teams to disasters across the world.[514] In 1955 Israel began its
iforeign aid programme in Burma. The programme's focus subsequently shifted to
iAfrica.[515] Israel's humanitarian efforts officially began in 1957, with the
iestablishment of Mashav, the Israel's Agency for International Development
iCooperation.[516] In this early period, whilst Israel's aid represented only
ia
ismall percentage of total aid to Africa, its programme was effective in
icreating goodwill throughout the continent; however, following the 1967 war
irelations soured.[517] Israel's foreign aid programme subsequently shifted
iits
ifocus to Latin America.[515] Since the late 1970s Israel's foreign aid has
igradually decreased, although in recent years Israel has tried to reestablish
iits aid to Africa.[518] There are additional Israeli humanitarian and
iemergency response groups that work with the Israel government, including
iIsraAid, a joint programme run by 14 Israeli organizations and North American
iJewish groups,[519] ZAKA,[520] The Fast Israeli Rescue and Search Team
i(FIRST),[521] Israeli Flying Aid (IFA),[522] Save a Child's Heart (SACH)[523]
iand Latet.[524] Between 1985 and 2015, Israel sent 24 delegations of IDF
isearch and rescue unit, the Home Front Command, to 22 countries.[525]
iCurrently Israeli foreign aid ranks low among OECD nations, spending less
ithan
i0.1% of its GNI on development assistance.[526] The UN has set a target of
i0.7%. In 2015 six nations reached the UN target.[527] The country ranked 38th
iin the 2018 World Giving Index.[528]
i
iThe Israel Defense Forces (IDF) is the sole military wing of the Israeli
isecurity forces, and is headed by its Chief of General Staff, the Ramatkal,
isubordinate to the Cabinet. The IDF consists of the army, air force and navy.
iIt was founded during the 1948 Arab–Israeli War by consolidating paramilitary
iorganizations—chiefly the Haganah—that preceded the establishment of the
istate.[529] The IDF also draws upon the resources of the Military
iIntelligence
iDirectorate (Aman), which works with Mossad and Shabak.[530] The Israel
iDefense Forces have been involved in several major wars and border conflicts
iin its short history, making it one of the most battle-trained armed forces
iin
ithe world.[531]
i
iMost Israelis are drafted into the military at the age of 18. Men serve two
iyears and eight months and women two years.[532] Following mandatory service,
iIsraeli men join the reserve forces and usually do up to several weeks of
ireserve duty every year until their forties. Most women are exempt from
ireserve duty. Arab citizens of Israel (except the Druze) and those engaged in
ifull-time religious studies are exempt from military service, although the
iexemption of yeshiva students has been a source of contention in Israeli
isociety for many years.[533][534] An alternative for those who receive
iexemptions on various grounds is Sherut Leumi, or national service, which
iinvolves a programme of service in hospitals, schools and other social
iwelfare
iframeworks.[535] A small minority of Israeli Arabs also volunteer to serve in
ithe army.[536] As a result of its conscription programme, the IDF maintains
iapproximately 176,500 active troops and an additional 465,000 reservists,
igiving Israel one of the world's highest percentage of citizens with military
itraining.[537]
i
iThe nation's military relies heavily on high-tech weapons systems designed
iand manufactured in Israel as well as some foreign imports. The Arrow missile
iis one of the world's few operational anti-ballistic missile systems.[538]
iThe
iPython air-to-air missile series is often considered one of the most crucial
iweapons in its military history.[539] Israel's Spike missile is one of the
imost widely exported anti-tank guided missiles (ATGMs) in the world.[540]
iIsrael's Iron Dome anti-missile air defense system gained worldwide acclaim
iafter intercepting hundreds of Qassam, 122 mm Grad and Fajr-5 artillery
irockets fire by Palestinian militants from the Gaza Strip.[541][542] Since
ithe
iYom Kippur War, Israel has developed a network of reconnaissance
isatellites.[543] The success of the Ofeq programme has made Israel one of
iseven countries capable of launching such satellites.[544]
i
iIsrael is widely believed to possess nuclear weapons[545] and per a 1993
ireport, chemical and biological weapons of mass destruction.[546][needs
iupdate] Israel has not signed the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
iWeapons[547] and maintains a policy of deliberate ambiguity toward its
inuclear
icapabilities.[548] The Israeli Navy's Dolphin submarines are believed to be
iarmed with nuclear Popeye Turbo missiles, offering second-strike
icapability.[549] Since the Gulf War in 1991, when Israel was attacked by
iIraqi
iScud missiles, all homes in Israel are required to have a reinforced security
iroom, Merkhav Mugan, impermeable to chemical and biological substances.[550]
i
iSince Israel's establishment, military expenditure constituted a significant
iportion of the country's gross domestic product, with peak of 30.3% of GDP
ispent on defense in 1975.[551] In 2021, Israel ranked 15th in the world by
itotal military expenditure, with $24.3 billion, and 6th by defense spending
ias
ia percentage of GDP, with 5.2%.[552] Since 1974, the United States has been a
iparticularly notable contributor of military aid to Israel.[553] Under a
imemorandum of understanding signed in 2016, the U.S. is expected to provide
ithe country with $3.8 billion per year, or around 20% of Israel's defense
ibudget, from 2018 to 2028.[554] Israel ranked 9th globally for arms exports
iin
i2022.[555] The majority of Israel's arms exports are unreported for security
ireasons.[556] Israel is consistently rated low in the Global Peace Index,
iranking 134th out of 163 nations for peacefulness in 2022.[557]
i
i===== Economy =====
i
iIsrael is considered the most advanced country in Western Asia and the Middle
iEast in economic and industrial development.[558][559] In recent years Israel
ihas had the highest growth rate in the Western world along with Ireland.[560]
iIn 2023, the IMF estimated Israel's GDP at 564 billion dollars and Israel's
iGDP per capita at 58,270 (ranking 13rd worldwide), a figure comparable to
iother highly developed and rich countries.[561] Israel has the highest
iaverage
iwealth per adult in the Middle East.[562] The Economist ranked Israel as the
i4th most successful economy among the developed countries for 2022.[563] It
ihas the highest number of billionaires in the Middle East ranked 18th.[564]
iIsrael's quality university education and the establishment of a highly
imotivated and educated populace is largely responsible for spurring the
icountry's high technology boom and rapid economic development.[363] In 2010,
iit joined the OECD.[24][565] The country is ranked 20th in the World Economic
iForum's Global Competitiveness Report[566] and 35th on the World Bank's Ease
iof Doing Business index.[567] Israel was also ranked fifth in the world by
ishare of people in high-skilled employment.[568] Israeli economic data covers
ithe economic territory of Israel, including the Golan Heights, East Jerusalem
iand Israeli settlements in the West Bank.[411]
i
iDespite limited natural resources, intensive development of the agricultural
iand industrial sectors over the past decades has made Israel largely
iself-sufficient in food production, apart from grains and beef. Imports to
iIsrael, totaling $96.5 billion in 2020, include raw materials, military
iequipment, investment goods, rough diamonds, fuels, grain, and consumer
igoods.[274] Leading exports include machinery and equipment, software, cut
idiamonds, agricultural products, chemicals, and textiles and apparel; in
i2020,
iIsraeli exports reached $114 billion.[274] The Bank of Israel holds $201
ibillion of foreign-exchange reserves, the 17th highest in the world.[274]
iSince the 1970s, Israel has received military aid from the United States, as
iwell as economic assistance in the form of loan guarantees, which now account
ifor roughly half of Israel's external debt. Israel has one of the lowest
iexternal debts in the developed world, and is a lender in terms of net
iexternal debt (assets vs. liabilities abroad), which in 2015[update] stood at
ia surplus of $69 billion.[569]
i
iIsrael has the second-largest number of startup companies in the world after
ithe United States,[570] and the third-largest number of NASDAQ-listed
icompanies after the U.S. and China.[571] It is the world leader for number of
istart-ups per capita.[572] Intel[573] and Microsoft[574] built their first
ioverseas research and development facilities in Israel, and other high-tech
imulti-national corporations, such as IBM, Google, Apple, Hewlett-Packard,
iCisco Systems, Facebook and Motorola have opened research and development
icentres in the country. In 2007, American investor Warren Buffett's holding
icompany Berkshire Hathaway bought the Israeli company Iscar for $4 billion,
iits first acquisition outside the United States.[575]
i
iThe days which are allocated to working times in Israel are Sunday through
iThursday (for a five-day workweek), or Friday (for a six-day workweek). In
iobservance of Shabbat, in places where Friday is a work day and the majority
iof population is Jewish, Friday is a "short day", usually lasting until 14:00
iin the winter, or 16:00 in the summer. Several proposals have been raised to
iadjust the work week with the majority of the world, and make Sunday a
inon-working day, while extending working time of other days or replacing
iFriday with Sunday as a work day.[576]
i
iIsrael's development of cutting-edge technologies in software, communications
iand the life sciences have evoked comparisons with Silicon Valley.[577][578]
iIsrael is first in the world in expenditure on research and development as a
ipercentage of GDP.[579] It is ranked sixteenth in the Global Innovation Index
iin 2022, down from tenth in 2019 and fifth in the 2019 Bloomberg Innovation
iIndex.[580][581][582][583][584][585] Israel has 140 scientists, technicians,
iand engineers per 10,000 employees, the highest number in the world, for
icomparison the U.S. has 85 per 100,000.[586][587][588] Israel has produced
isix
iNobel Prize-winning scientists since 2004[589] and has been frequently ranked
ias one of the countries with the highest ratios of scientific papers per
icapita in the world.[590][591][592] Israel has led the world in stem-cell
iresearch papers per capita since 2000.[593] Israeli universities are ranked
iamong the top 50 world universities in computer science (Technion and Tel
iAviv
iUniversity), mathematics (Hebrew University of Jerusalem) and chemistry
i(Weizmann Institute of Science).[387]
i
iIn 2012, Israel was ranked ninth in the world by the Futron's Space
iCompetitiveness Index.[594] The Israel Space Agency coordinates all Israeli
ispace research programmes with scientific and commercial goals, and have
iindigenously designed and built at least 13 commercial, research and spy
isatellites.[595] Some of Israel's satellites are ranked among the world's
imost
iadvanced space systems.[596] Shavit is a space launch vehicle produced by
iIsrael to launch small satellites into low Earth orbit.[597] It was first
ilaunched in 1988, making Israel the eighth nation to have a space launch
icapability. In 2003, Ilan Ramon became Israel's first astronaut, serving as
ipayload specialist of STS-107, the fatal mission of the Space Shuttle
iColumbia.[598]
i
iThe ongoing shortage of water in the country has spurred innovation in water
iconservation techniques, and a substantial agricultural modernization, drip
iirrigation, was invented in Israel. Israel is also at the technological
iforefront of desalination and water recycling. The Sorek desalination plant
iis
ithe largest seawater reverse osmosis (SWRO) desalination facility in the
iworld.[599] By 2014, Israel's desalination programmes provided roughly 35% of
iIsrael's drinking water and it is expected to supply 40% by 2015 and 70% by
i2050.[600] As of 2015[update], more than 50 percent of the water for Israeli
ihouseholds, agriculture and industry is artificially produced.[601] The
icountry hosts an annual Water Technology and Environmental Control Exhibition
i& Conference (WATEC) that attracts thousands of people from across the
iworld.[602][603] In 2011, Israel's water technology industry was worth around
i$2 billion a year with annual exports of products and services in the tens of
imillions of dollars. As a result of innovations in reverse osmosis
itechnology,
iIsrael is set to become a net exporter of water in the coming years.[604]
i
iIsrael has embraced solar energy; its engineers are on the cutting edge of
isolar energy technology[606] and its solar companies work on projects around
ithe world.[607][608] Over 90% of Israeli homes use solar energy for hot
iwater,
ithe highest per capita in the world.[293][609] According to government
ifigures, the country saves 8% of its electricity consumption per year because
iof its solar energy use in heating.[610] The high annual incident solar
iirradiance at its geographic latitude creates ideal conditions for what is an
iinternationally renowned solar research and development industry in the Negev
iDesert.[606][607][608] Israel had a modern electric car infrastructure
iinvolving a countrywide network of charging stations to facilitate the
icharging and exchange of car batteries. It was thought that this would have
ilowered Israel's oil dependency and lowered the fuel costs of hundreds of
iIsrael's motorists that use cars powered only by electric
ibatteries.[611][612][613] The Israeli model was being studied by several
icountries and being implemented in Denmark and Australia.[614] However,
iIsrael's trailblazing electric car company Better Place shut down in
i2013.[615]
i
iIsrael began producing natural gas from its own offshore gas fields in 2004.
iBetween 2005 and 2012, Israel had imported gas from Egypt via the
ial-Arish–Ashkelon pipeline, which was terminated due to Egyptian Crisis of
i2011–14. In 2009, a natural gas reserve, Tamar, was found near the coast of
iIsrael. A second natural gas reserve, Leviathan, was discovered in 2010.[616]
iThe natural gas reserves in these two fields (Leviathan has around 19
itrillion
icubic feet) could make Israel energy secure for more than 50 years. In 2013,
iIsrael began commercial production of natural gas from the Tamar field. As of
i2014[update], Israel produced over 7.5 billion cubic meters (bcm) of natural
igas a year.[617] Israel had 199 billion cubic meters (bcm) of proven reserves
iof natural gas as of the start of 2016.[618] The Leviathan gas field started
iproduction in 2019.[619]
i
iKetura Sun is Israel's first commercial solar field. Built in early 2011 by
ithe Arava Power Company on Kibbutz Ketura, Ketura Sun covers twenty acres and
iis expected to produce green energy amounting to 4.95 megawatts (MW). The
ifield consists of 18,500 photovoltaic panels made by Suntech, which will
iproduce about 9 gigawatt-hours (GWh) of electricity per year.[620] In the
inext
itwenty years, the field will spare the production of some 125,000 metric tons
iof carbon dioxide.[621] The field was inaugurated on 15 June 2011.[622] On 22
iMay 2012 Arava Power Company announced that it had reached financial close on
ian additional 58.5 MW for 8 projects to be built in the Arava and the Negev
ivalued at 780 million NIS or approximately $204 million.[623]
i
iIsrael has a modern transport system. The country has 19,224 kilometres
i(11,945 mi) of paved roads,[624] and 3 million motor vehicles.[625] The
inumber
iof motor vehicles per 1,000 persons is 365, relatively low with respect to
ideveloped countries.[625] Israel has 5,715 buses on scheduled routes,[626]
ioperated by several carriers, the largest and oldest of which is Egged,
iserving most of the country.[627] Railways stretch across 1,277 kilometres
i(793 mi) and are operated solely by government-owned Israel Railways.[628]
iFollowing major investments beginning in the early to mid-1990s, the number
iof
itrain passengers per year has grown from 2.5 million in 1990, to 53 million
iin
i2015; railways are also transporting 7.5 million tons of cargo, per
iyear.[628]
i
iIsrael is served by two international airports, Ben Gurion Airport, the
icountry's main hub for international air travel near Tel Aviv, and Ramon
iAirport, which serves the southernmost port city of Eilat. Ben Gurion,
iIsrael's largest airport, handled over 15 million passengers in 2015.[629]
iThe
icountry has three main ports: the Port of Haifa, the country's oldest and
ilargest, on the Mediterranean coast, Ashdod Port; and the smaller Port of
iEilat on the Red Sea.
i
iTourism, especially religious tourism, is an important industry in Israel,
iwith the country's temperate climate, beaches, archaeological, other
ihistorical and biblical sites, and unique geography also drawing tourists.
iIsrael's security problems have taken their toll on the industry, but the
inumber of incoming tourists is on the rebound.[630] In 2017, a record of 3.6
imillion tourists visited Israel, yielding a 25 percent growth since 2016 and
icontributed NIS 20 billion to the Israeli economy.[631][632][633][634]
i
iHousing prices in Israel are listed in the top third,[635] with an average of
i150 salaries required to buy an apartment.[636] As of 2022, there are about
i2.7 million properties in Israel, with an annual increase of more than
i50,000.[637] However, the demand for housing exceeds supply, with a shortage
iof about 200,000 apartments as of 2021,[638] and thus rising house prices. As
ia result, by 2021 housing prices rose by 5.6%.[639] High prices do not stop
iIsraelis from buying properties. In 2021, Israelis took a record of NIS 116.1
ibillion in mortgages, an increase of 50% from 2020.[640]
i
i===== Culture =====
i
iIsrael's diverse culture stems from the diversity of its population. Jews
ifrom diaspora communities around the world brought their cultural and
ireligious traditions back with them, creating a melting pot of Jewish customs
iand beliefs.[641] Arab influences are present in many cultural
ispheres,[642][643] such as architecture,[644] music,[645] and cuisine.[646]
iIsrael is the only country in the world where life revolves around the Hebrew
icalendar. Work and school holidays are determined by the Jewish holidays, and
ithe official day of rest is Saturday, the Jewish Sabbath.[647]
i
iIsraeli literature is primarily poetry and prose written in Hebrew, as part
iof the renaissance of Hebrew as a spoken language since the mid-19th century,
ialthough a small body of literature is published in other languages, such as
iEnglish. By law, two copies of all printed matter published in Israel must be
ideposited in the National Library of Israel at the Hebrew University of
iJerusalem. In 2001, the law was amended to include audio and video
irecordings,
iand other non-print media.[648] In 2016, 89 percent of the 7,300 books
itransferred to the library were in Hebrew.[649]
i
iIn 1966, Shmuel Yosef Agnon shared the Nobel Prize in Literature with German
iJewish author Nelly Sachs.[650] Leading Israeli poets have been Yehuda
iAmichai, Nathan Alterman, Leah Goldberg, and Rachel Bluwstein.[citation
ineeded] Internationally famous contemporary Israeli novelists include Amos
iOz,
iEtgar Keret and David Grossman.[citation needed] The Israeli-Arab satirist
iSayed Kashua (who writes in Hebrew) is also internationally known.[citation
ineeded] Israel has also been the home of Emile Habibi, whose novel The Secret
iLife of Saeed: The Pessoptimist, and other writings, won him the Israel prize
ifor Arabic literature.[651][652]
i
iIsraeli music contains musical influences from all over the world; Mizrahi
iand Sephardic music, Hasidic melodies, Greek music, jazz, and pop rock are
iall
ipart of the music scene.[653][654] Among Israel's world-renowned[655][656]
iorchestras is the Israel Philharmonic Orchestra, which has been in operation
ifor over seventy years and today performs more than two hundred concerts each
iyear.[657] Itzhak Perlman, Pinchas Zukerman and Ofra Haza are among the
iinternationally acclaimed musicians born in Israel. Israel has participated
iin
ithe Eurovision Song Contest nearly every year since 1973, winning the
icompetition four times and hosting it twice.[658][659] Eilat has hosted its
iown international music festival, the Red Sea Jazz Festival, every summer
isince 1987.[660] The nation's canonical folk songs, known as "Songs of the
iLand of Israel," deal with the experiences of the pioneers in building the
iJewish homeland.[661]
i
iTen Israeli films have been final nominees for Best Foreign Language Film at
ithe Academy Awards since the establishment of Israel. The 2009 movie Ajami
iwas
ithe third consecutive nomination of an Israeli film.[662] Palestinian Israeli
ifilmmakers have made a number of films dealing with the Arab-Israeli conflict
iand the status of Palestinians within Israel, such as Mohammed Bakri's 2002
ifilm Jenin, Jenin and The Syrian Bride.[citation needed]
i
iContinuing the strong theatrical traditions of the Yiddish theatre in Eastern
iEurope, Israel maintains a vibrant theatre scene. Founded in 1918, Habima
iTheatre in Tel Aviv is Israel's oldest repertory theater company and national
itheater.[663]
i
iThe 2017 Freedom of the Press annual report by Freedom House ranked Israel as
ithe Middle East and North Africa's most free country, and 64th globally.[664]
iIn the 2017 Press Freedom Index by Reporters Without Borders, Israel
i(including "Israel extraterritorial" since 2013 ranking)[665] was placed 91st
iof 180 countries, first in the Middle East and North Africa region.[666]
iReporters Without Borders noted that "Palestinian journalists are
isystematically subjected to violence as a result of their coverage of events
iin the West Bank".[667] More than fifty Palestinian journalists have been
ikilled by Israel since 2001.[668]
i
iThe Israel Museum in Jerusalem is one of Israel's most important cultural
iinstitutions[669] and houses the Dead Sea Scrolls,[670] along with an
iextensive collection of Judaica and European art.[669] Israel's national
iHolocaust museum, Yad Vashem, is the world central archive of
iHolocaust-related information.[671] ANU - Museum of the Jewish People on the
icampus of Tel Aviv University, is an interactive museum devoted to the
ihistory
iof Jewish communities around the world.[672] Apart from the major museums in
ilarge cities, there are high-quality art spaces in many towns and kibbutzim.
iMishkan LeOmanut in kibbutz Ein Harod Meuhad is the largest art museum in the
inorth of the country.[673]
i
iIsrael has the highest number of museums per capita in the world.[674]
iSeveral Israeli museums are devoted to Islamic culture, including the
iRockefeller Museum and the L. A. Mayer Institute for Islamic Art, both in
iJerusalem. The Rockefeller specializes in archaeological remains from the
iOttoman and other periods of Middle East history. It is also the home of the
ifirst hominid fossil skull found in Western Asia, called Galilee Man.[675] A
icast of the skull is on display at the Israel Museum.[676]
i
iIsraeli cuisine includes local dishes as well as Jewish cuisine brought to
ithe country by immigrants from the diaspora. Since the establishment of the
istate in 1948, and particularly since the late 1970s, an Israeli fusion
icuisine has developed.[677] Israeli cuisine has adopted, and continues to
iadapt, elements of the Mizrahi, Sephardi, and Ashkenazi styles of cooking. It
iincorporates many foods traditionally eaten in the Levantine, Arab, Middle
iEastern and Mediterranean cuisines, such as falafel, hummus, shakshouka,
icouscous, and za'atar. Schnitzel, pizza, hamburgers, French fries, rice and
isalad are also common in Israel.[citation needed]
i
iRoughly half of the Israeli-Jewish population attests to keeping kosher at
ihome.[678][679] Kosher restaurants, though rare in the 1960s, make up around
ia
iquarter of the total as of 2015[update], perhaps reflecting the largely
isecular values of those who dine out.[677] Hotel restaurants are much more
ilikely to serve kosher food.[677] The non-kosher retail market was
itraditionally sparse, but grew rapidly and considerably following the influx
iof immigrants from the post-Soviet states during the 1990s.[680] Together
iwith
inon-kosher fish, rabbits and ostriches, pork—often called "white meat" in
iIsrael[680]—is produced and consumed, though it is forbidden by both Judaism
iand Islam.[681]
i
iThe most popular spectator sports in Israel are association football and
ibasketball.[682] The Israeli Premier League is the country's premier football
ileague, and the Israeli Basketball Premier League is the premier basketball
ileague.[683] Maccabi Haifa, Maccabi Tel Aviv, Hapoel Tel Aviv and Beitar
iJerusalem are the largest football clubs. Maccabi Tel Aviv, Maccabi Haifa and
iHapoel Tel Aviv have competed in the UEFA Champions League and Hapoel Tel
iAviv
ireached the UEFA Cup quarter-finals. Israel hosted and won the 1964 AFC Asian
iCup; in 1970 the Israel national football team qualified for the FIFA World
iCup, the only time it participated in the World Cup. The 1974 Asian Games,
iheld in Tehran, were the last Asian Games in which Israel participated,
iplagued by the Arab countries that refused to compete with Israel. Israel was
iexcluded from the 1978 Asian Games and since then has not competed in Asian
isport events.[684] In 1994, UEFA agreed to admit Israel, and its football
iteams now compete in Europe.[citation needed] Maccabi Tel Aviv B.C. has won
ithe European championship in basketball six times.[685] In 2016, the country
iwas chosen as a host for the EuroBasket 2017.
i
iIsrael has won nine Olympic medals since its first win in 1992, including a
igold medal in windsurfing at the 2004 Summer Olympics.[686] Israel has won
iover 100 gold medals in the Paralympic Games and is ranked 20th in the
iall-time medal count. The 1968 Summer Paralympics were hosted by Israel.[687]
iThe Maccabiah Games, an Olympic-style event for Jewish and Israeli athletes,
iwas inaugurated in the 1930s, and has been held every four years since then.
iIsraeli tennis champion Shahar Pe'er ranked 11th in the world on 31 January
i2011.[688] Krav Maga, a martial art developed by Jewish ghetto defenders
iduring the struggle against fascism in Europe, is used by the Israeli
isecurity
iforces and police. Its effectiveness and practical approach to self-defense,
ihave won it widespread admiration and adherence around the world.[689]
i
iChess is a leading sport in Israel and is enjoyed by people of all ages.
iThere are many Israeli grandmasters and Israeli chess players have won a
inumber of youth world championships.[690] Israel stages an annual
iinternational championship and hosted the World Team Chess Championship in
i2005. The Ministry of Education and the World Chess Federation agreed upon a
iproject of teaching chess within Israeli schools, and it has been introduced
iinto the curriculum of some schools.[691] The city of Beersheba has become a
inational chess center, with the game being taught in the city's
ikindergartens.
iOwing partly to Soviet immigration, it is home to the largest number of chess
igrandmasters of any city in the world.[692][693] The Israeli chess team won
ithe silver medal at the 2008 Chess Olympiad[694] and the bronze, coming in
ithird among 148 teams, at the 2010 Olympiad. Israeli grandmaster Boris
iGelfand
iwon the Chess World Cup 2009[695] and the 2011 Candidates Tournament for the
iright to challenge the world champion. He lost the World Chess Championship
i2012 to reigning world champion Anand after a speed-chess tie breaker.
i
i===== See also =====
i
i===== References =====
i
i
i
i  ------------- SOURCE ----------------
i
iURL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Israel
i
iLICENSE: Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike
i
i=========================================
i
i
i$
Bt:Israel - Wikipedia	/x/w/g/https_58__47__47_en_46_wikipedia_46_org_47_wiki_47_Israel	texopher.com	70
