i
1[?] Read Details	/x/w/gd/https_58__47__47_en_46_wikipedia_46_org_47_wiki_47_Casemiro	texopher.com	70
i
i===== Contents =====
i
i1Club career
i
i1.1São Paulo
i
i1.1.12003–2010: Youth career
i
i1.1.22010–2013: Consistent success
i
i1.2Real Madrid
i
i1.2.12013–2015: First successes and loan to Porto
i
i1.2.22015–2016: Becoming first-choice
i
i1.2.32016–2022: Prolific success
i
i1.3Manchester United
i
i2International career
i
i2.1Youth teams
i
i2.2Senior team
i
i3Style of play
i
i4Career statistics
i
i4.1Club
i
i4.2International
i
i5Honours
i
i6References
i
i7External links
i
iWikimedia Commons Wikinews
i
iFrom Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
i
iBrazilian footballer (born 1992)
i
iCasemiro with Brazil in 2018
i
iCurrent team
i
iMedal record
i
iMen's football Representing Brazil Copa América Winner 2019 Runner-up 2021
iFIFA U-20 World Cup Winner 2011 South American U-20 Championship Winner 2011
iSouth American U-17 Championship Winner 2009
i
iCarlos Henrique Casimiro (born 23 February 1992), known as Casemiro,[4] is a
iBrazilian professional footballer who plays as a defensive midfielder for
iPremier League club Manchester United and captains the Brazil national team.
iKnown for his strength, work rate, and aggressive play, Casemiro is widely
iregarded as one of the best defensive-midfielders in the world.[5][6][7]
i
iCasemiro started his career with São Paulo, where he scored 11 goals in 111
igames. He moved to Real Madrid in 2013, and also spent the 2014–15 season on
iloan at Porto. He won eighteen trophies at Real Madrid, including five UEFA
iChampions Leagues, three La Liga titles, one Copa del Rey and three FIFA Club
iWorld Cups. In 2022, he left Madrid to join Manchester United, winning the
iEFL
iCup in his first season.
i
iA full international since 2011, Casemiro was in Brazil's squad at the 2018
iand 2022 FIFA World Cups, as well as four Copa América tournaments, winning
ithe 2019 edition.
i
i===== Club career =====
i
iBorn in São José dos Campos, São Paulo, Casemiro was a product of São Paulo's
iyouth system. From the age of 11 upwards, he acted as captain to its
isides;[8][9] he was known as "Carlão" – an augmentative form of his first
iname
iin Portuguese – early on, and would be called up for the 2009 FIFA U-17 World
iCup.[10]
i
iCasemiro made his Série A debut on 25 July 2010, in an away loss against
iSantos. He scored his first goal as a professional on 15 August, helping to a
i2–2 draw with Cruzeiro.[11]
i
iOn 7 April 2012, Casemiro scored the first goal of a 2–0 win over Mogi Mirim
iat the Arena Barueri in that year's Campeonato Paulista after replacing the
iinjured Fabrício early on, but was later sent off.[12] São Paulo also won the
iCopa Sudamericana, with the player making one substitute appearance in a 5–0
ihome success against Universidad de Chile in the quarter-final second leg on
i7
iNovember.[13]
i
iOn 31 January 2013, Casemiro was loaned to Real Madrid in Spain, being
iassigned to the B-team in Segunda División.[14] He played his first game in
ithe competition on 16 February, starting in a 1–3 defeat at Sabadell.[15]
iCasemiro made his La Liga debut on 20 April, playing the full 90 minutes in a
i3–1 home win over Real Betis.[16] On 2 June, he scored his first goal in
iEurope, opening the reserves' 4–0 win over Alcorcón at the Alfredo Di Stéfano
iStadium.[17] Eight days after his first goal for Real Madrid Castilla, the
imove was made permanent for four years and a fee of R$18.738 million was
ipaid.[18][19][20]
i
iCasemiro was loaned to Porto on 19 July 2014 in a season-long loan.[21] He
itotalled 41 games overall for the Portuguese club, scoring four goals,[22]
iincluding a free kick on 10 March 2015 in a 4–0 home win over Basel in the
ilast 16 of the UEFA Champions League.[23]
i
iOn 5 June 2015, Casemiro returned to Real Madrid who activated his buyback
iclause,[24] and two months later his contract was extended until 2021.[25] On
i13 March 2016, he scored his first competitive goal for the Merengues,
iheading
ihome an 89th-minute corner kick by Jesé in a 2–1 victory at Las Palmas.[26]
iAfter being mostly a reserve player under Rafael Benítez, Casemiro became
ifirst-choice under his successor Zinedine Zidane,[27] and contributed with 11
iappearances in that season's Champions League. In the final against Atlético
iMadrid, he featured the full 120 minutes, as Real Madrid won their 11th title
iin a penalty shoot-out after a 1–1 draw.[28]
i
iCasemiro scored four goals in 25 matches in the 2016–17 La Liga, helping his
iteam win the league title for the first time in five years.[29][30] He then
iscored a long-range strike in the Champions League final against Juventus,
ihelping his team to a 4–1 victory.[31] He again found the net on 8 August,
iputting his team ahead in a 2–1 victory over Manchester United in the 2017
iUEFA Super Cup.[32]
i
iDuring the 2017–18 Champions League, Casemiro made 12 appearances while
iscoring one goal,[33] as Madrid won their third consecutive and 13th overall
ititle in the competition.[34] He was a regular starter during the season, as
iReal Madrid won the 2019–20 La Liga.[35] In August 2021, he extended his
icontract until June 2025.[36] Casemiro was a starter for Real Madrid when
ithey
iwon their 14th Champions League title. Casemiro was named Man of the Match,
ias
iReal Madrid defeated Eintracht Frankfurt 2–0 for the 2022 Super Cup.[37]
i
iOn 19 August 2022, Real Madrid and Manchester United announced that they had
ireached an agreement for the transfer of Casemiro.[38][39] Three days later,
ihe signed a four-year contract with the English club, with an option for an
iadditional year's extension.[40] The deal was reportedly worth £60 million,
iplus £10 million in add-ons.[41] Casemiro was later reported as having
ipreviously told his agent to relay a message to Manchester United that he
iwould bring them back into form after their 4-0 defeat at the hands of
iBrentford, saying "Tell them I’ll fix it."[42] He made his debut for the club
iwhen he came on as a substitute in a Premier League win away at Southampton
ion
i27 August.[43] On 22 October, he scored his first Premier League goal from a
iheader in the 94th minute in a 1–1 away draw against Chelsea.[44]
i
iCasemiro was highly praised by his manager Erik ten Hag in January, who
icommented: "Casemiro is magnificent. In front of the back line, always taking
igood positions, in and out of position. And he can deal with the ball, he can
igive the right pass. So, he can accelerate the game and if necessary, he can
iscore."[45] On 4 February, Casemiro was given a red card for violent conduct
iduring a match against Crystal Palace for putting his hands around the neck
iof
iWill Hughes during a confrontation which also saw Antony and Jeffrey Schlupp
ireceive yellow cards. This resulted in a three-match domestic ban; United
iwould go on to win the match 2–1.[46] On 26 February, Man Utd won the EFL
iCup,
iCasemiro's first trophy at the club and United's first trophy since 2017,
iwith
iCasemiro scoring the opening goal in the 33rd minute of the 2-0 victory
iagainst Newcastle United. His performance also earned him the Alan Hardaker
iTrophy. On 12 March, Casemiro was given a red card for a tackle on Carlos
iAlcaraz in a match against Southampton where referee Anthony Taylor
ioverturned
ihis initial yellow card decision for a straight red card after a VAR review,
iand Casemiro received a four match suspension; Man Utd would go on to draw
ithe
imatch 0-0.[47] Casemiro would be the only player of the 2022-23 Premier
iLeague
ito receive 2 red cards, and the only Man Utd player to receive a red card for
ithat season.[48]
i
i===== International career =====
i
iCasemiro scored one goal in seven appearances for the Brazil under-17
iteam.[49] He played for the Brazil under-20 team at the 2011 South American
iU-20 Championship and the 2011 FIFA U-20 World Cup,[50] scoring three goals
iin
i15 appearances in total at this level.[49]
i
iCasemiro made his debut for the Brazil senior team on 14 September 2011, in a
i0–0 draw against Argentina, aged 19.[51] He was named by manager Dunga in the
iBrazilian squad for the 2015 Copa América, but did not play any matches in
ithe
iquarter-final exit in Chile.[52]
i
iOn 5 May 2016, he was named among the 23-man list for the Copa América
iCentenario to be held in the United States.[53]
i
iIn May 2018, Casemiro was selected by manager Tite for the 2018 FIFA World
iCup in Russia.[54] He made his debut in the competition on 17 June, playing
i60
iminutes in a 1–1 group stage draw to Switzerland.[55]
i
iIn May 2019, he was included in Brazil's 23-man squad for the 2019 Copa
iAmérica on home soil.[56] In the final group game at the Arena Corinthians
iagainst Peru, he scored his first international goal to open a 5–0 victory,
ibut was also sent off for two yellow cards and suspended from the next
imatch.[57] He started in Brazil's 3–1 victory over Peru in the 2019 Copa
iAmérica Final on 7 July, at the Maracanã Stadium.[58]
i
iHe was named to the 2021 Copa América squad on 9 June 2021.[59] In Brazil's
ithird group match on 23 June, he scored the match–winning goal following a
iNeymar corner in injury time, to help his team defeat Colombia 2–1.[60] On 10
iJuly, he started in his nation's 1–0 defeat to rivals Argentina in the
ifinal.[61]
i
iOn 7 November 2022, Casemiro was named in the squad for the 2022 World Cup in
iQatar.[62] On 28 November, he scored the winning goal in the second group
imatch against Switzerland.[63] Brazil were eliminated by Croatia in the
iquarter-finals on 9 December, following a 4–2 penalty shoot-out loss after a
i1–1 draw following extra-time, although Casemiro was able to net his spot
ikick.[64]
i
i===== Style of play =====
i
iCasemiro mainly plays as a defensive midfielder,[65] although he has also
ibeen deployed in anchor man role in the centre of the pitch,[66][67] or even
ias a centre-back on occasion.[68] Casemiro is an intelligent, physically
istrong, mobile, aggressive, and hard-tackling midfielder, with an extremely
ihigh work-rate and good technical ability.[69][67][70][71] While he is mainly
iknown for his ability to provide balance to his teams by supporting his more
ioffensive-minded teammates defensively, and distributing the ball to them
iaccurately after winning back possession, he is also a well-rounded
imidfielder, who possesses a powerful shot from outside the penalty area, and
ireliable distribution, as well as an ability to get forward with his runs off
ithe ball, or start attacks with his passing. These characteristics also
ienable
ihim to contribute offensively, or even score goals, in addition to breaking
iup
iplays.[67][72][73][74][75][76] Moreover, his quick reactions, as well as his
iexcellent positional sense, ability to read the game, and good anticipation,
ienable him to excel in a holding midfield role in front of the defence, by
icutting out counter-attacks and shielding the back-line.[67][69][77][78][79]
i
iOften described as a "destroyer" in the media,[80] he has drawn praise from
ipundits for his energetic and combative style of play,[81][82][83] as well as
ihis tactical awareness and abilities as a ball winner, which enable him to
icover ground, track back, and press opponents.[72][76][78][84][85][86] His
itenacity on the pitch, exemplified by his fierce challenges and stamina,[87]
ihave led Marca to nickname him "The Tank."[88] In addition to his footballing
iabilities, he also stands out for his competitive spirit, mentality,
iconsistency, and determination on the pitch.[69][89] Despite maintaining a
igood disciplinary record, he has, however, also come into criticism in the
imedia at times over his excessively aggressive challenges on the pitch.[90]
iCasemiro's playing style has drawn comparisons with that of former Real
iMadrid
idefensive midfielder Claude Makélélé,[69] as well as compatriot Toninho
iCerezo.[74]
i
i===== Career statistics =====
i
i^ Includes Campeonato Paulista ^ Includes Copa do Brasil, Copa del Rey, Taça
ide Portugal, FA Cup ^ Includes Taça da Liga, EFL Cup ^ a b Appearance(s) in
iCopa Sudamericana ^ Appearances in Copa Libertadores ^ a b c d e f g h i
iAppearances in UEFA Champions League ^ One appearance in UEFA Super Cup, two
iin FIFA Club World Cup ^ One appearance and one goal in UEFA Super Cup, two
iappearances in Supercopa de España, two in FIFA Club World Cup ^ One
iappearance in UEFA Super Cup, two in FIFA Club World Cup ^ a b c
iAppearance(s)
iin Supercopa de España ^ Appearance in UEFA Super Cup ^ Appearances in UEFA
iEuropa League
i
i===== Honours =====
i
iSão Paulo
i
iReal Madrid
i
iManchester United
i
iBrazil U17
i
iBrazil U20
i
iBrazil
i
iIndividual
i
i===== References =====
i
i^ "Acta del Partido celebrado el 20 de marzo de 2016, en Madrid" [Minutes of
ithe Match held on 20 March 2016, in Madrid] (in Spanish). Royal Spanish
iFootball Federation. Retrieved 15 June 2019. ^ "FIFA World Cup Russia 2018:
iList of Players: Brazil" (PDF). FIFA. 15 July 2018. p. 4. Archived from the
ioriginal (PDF) on 11 June 2019. ^ "Casemiro". Real Madrid CF. Retrieved 30
iDecember 2022. ^ ""Aonde você vai, Casemiro?" A história do segredo mais bem
iguardado do Real Madrid" ["Where are you going, Casemiro?" The story of Real
iMadrid's best kept secret]. El País (in Portuguese). 4 June 2017. Retrieved
i17
iNovember 2017. ^ "Best defensive midfielder in the world: Casemiro named in
iFIFPro World XI". ^ "Top 20 best defensive midfielders in the world today:
iwho
iare they?". ^ "Casemiro to Manchester United: Everything You Need to Know". ^
i"Brazil: the talent factory 2010 featuring Eron, Casemiro, Lucas Moura, Alan
iPatrick, Bernardo, Elkeson and Neto Berola". Pitaco do Gringo. 20 September
i2010. Retrieved 19 February 2011. ^ "Casemiro & Neymar, forever rivals".
iFIFA.
i12 September 2013. Archived from the original on 19 December 2013. Retrieved
i19 December 2013. ^ "11 jogadores que 'mudaram de nome' durante a carreira"
i[11 players who "changed names" during their careers] (in Portuguese).
iUniverso Online. 15 October 2016. Retrieved 23 October 2016. ^ "No finzinho,
iSão Paulo empata com o Cruzeiro em ótimo jogo no Morumbi" [In the very end,
iSão Paulo draw with Cruzeiro in great game at the Morumbi] (in Portuguese).
iGlobo Esporte. 15 August 2010. Retrieved 19 December 2013. ^ "Líder, São
iPaulo
ifreia Mogi Mirim e completa dez vitórias seguidas" [Leaders, São Paulo halt
iMogi Mirim and complete ten consecutive victories]. Veja (in Portuguese).
iAbril Comunicações. 7 April 2012. Retrieved 9 April 2018. ^ "Sao Paulo
iterminó
icon el sueño de U. de Chile en la Copa Sudamericana" [São Paulo ended the
idream of U. de Chile in the South American Cup] (in Spanish). Radio
iCooperativa. 7 July 2012. Retrieved 16 March 2016. ^ "São Paulo empresta
iCasemiro ao Real Madrid, e volante começará no time B" [São Paulo loan
iCasemiro to Real Madrid, and holding midfielder will start in B-team]. Lance!
i(in Portuguese). 31 January 2013. Archived from the original on 19 December
i2013. Retrieved 19 December 2013. ^ "3–1: Aníbal lidera la victoria del
iSabadell ante el Castilla" [3–1: Aníbal leads Sabadell win against Castilla].
iMundo Deportivo (in Spanish). Barcelona. 16 February 2013. Retrieved 19
iDecember 2013. ^ "Ozil at the double for faltering Real". ESPN FC. 20 April
i2013. Archived from the original on 1 January 2014. Retrieved 19 December
i2013. ^ Jiménez, Rubén (2 June 2013). "Fiesta de graduación del Castilla que
icomplica al Alcorcon" [Castilla graduation party makes life harder for
iAlcorcón]. Marca (in Spanish). Madrid. Retrieved 16 March 2016. ^ "Madrid
iannounce Casemiro deal". ESPN FC. 10 June 2013. Retrieved 19 December 2013. ^
i"Real Madrid anuncia oficialmente a compra de Casemiro" [Real Madrid
iofficially announce purchase of Casemiro]. Gazeta Esportiva (in Portuguese).
i10 June 2013. Archived from the original on 13 June 2013. Retrieved 10 June
i2013. ^ "Relatório da diretoria 2013" [Directorial report 2013] (PDF) (in
iPortuguese). São Paulo FC. 18 April 2014. Retrieved 9 June 2015. ^ "Official
iannouncement: Casemiro". Real Madrid CF. 19 July 2014. Retrieved 19 July
i2014.
i^ "Ex-FC Porto Casemiro é o exemplo de Lucas Silva" [Former FC Porto man
iCasemiro is Lucas Silva's model]. O Jogo (in Portuguese). Porto. 13 November
i2015. Archived from the original on 23 July 2018. Retrieved 16 March 2016. ^
i"Yacine Brahimi and Casemiro turn on the style to help Porto defeat Basel".
iThe Guardian. London. 10 March 2015. Retrieved 16 March 2016. ^ "Official
iannouncement: Casemiro". Real Madrid CF. 5 June 2015. Retrieved 5 June 2015.
i^
i"Official announcement: Casemiro". Real Madrid CF. 31 August 2015. Retrieved
i31 August 2015. ^ "Las Palmas 1–2 Real Madrid". BBC Sport. 13 March 2016.
iRetrieved 14 March 2016. ^ "La diferencia es Casemiro" [Casemiro is the
idifference]. Marca (in Spanish). Spain. 3 April 2016. Retrieved 30 May 2016.
i^
i"Spot-on Real Madrid defeat Atlético in final again". UEFA. 28 May 2016.
iRetrieved 29 May 2016. ^ "El Real Madrid, campeón de LaLiga Santander
i2016/17"
i[Real Madrid, LaLiga Santander champions 2016/17] (in Spanish). La Liga. 21
iMay 2017. Retrieved 22 May 2017. ^ "Malaga 0–2 Real Madrid". BBC Sport. 21
iMay
i2017. Retrieved 22 May 2017. ^ "Majestic Real Madrid win Champions League in
iCardiff". UEFA. 3 June 2017. Retrieved 4 June 2017. ^ "Isco goal gives Real
iMadrid victory over Manchester United in Super Cup". The Guardian. London. 8
iAugust 2017. Retrieved 10 August 2017. ^ "Así llegan Real Madrid y Liverpool
ia
ila final de la Champions" [That is how Real Madrid and Liverpool arrive to
ithe
iChampions final] (in Spanish). RCN Radio. 25 May 2018. Retrieved 29 May 2018.
i^ "Madrid beat Liverpool to complete hat-trick". UEFA. 26 May 2018. Retrieved
i28 May 2018. ^ "Real Madrid win the longest LaLiga Santander season". Marca.
iSpain. 17 July 2020. Retrieved 17 July 2020. ^ "Official Announcement:
iCasemiro". Real Madrid CF. Retrieved 27 August 2021. ^ "Real Madrid 2–0
iFrankfurt: Five-star Madrid triumph in Helsinki". UEFA. 10 August 2022.
iRetrieved 10 August 2022. ^ "Official Announcement: Casemiro". Real Madrid
iCF.
i19 August 2022. Retrieved 19 August 2022. ^ "United reach agreement for
iCasemiro transfer". Manchester United. 19 August 2022. Retrieved 24 August
i2022. ^ "Casemiro signs for Manchester United". Manchester United. 22 August
i2022. Retrieved 22 August 2022. ^ "Casemiro: Manchester United agree £70m
ideal
ito sign Real Madrid midfielder". BBC Sport. 19 August 2022. Retrieved 19
iAugust 2022. ^ "'Tell them I'll fix it' – Casemiro sent message to agent as
ihe
iwatched 4-0 Brentford defeat and stayed true to promise by transforming
iManchester United midfield". TalkSport. 13 January 2023. Retrieved 29 January
i2023. ^ McNulty, Phil (27 August 2022). "Southampton 0–1 Man Utd: Bruno
iFernandes scores only goal at St Mary's to end dismal away run". BBC Sport.
iRetrieved 27 August 2022. ^ McNulty, Phil (22 October 2022). "Chelsea 1–1 Man
iUtd: Hosts remain above United after dramatic finale". BBC Sport. Retrieved
i22
iOctober 2022. ^ "Erik ten Hag reacts to Manchester United versus Reading".
i90min. 28 January 2023. Retrieved 29 January 2023. ^ Stone, Simon (4 February
i2023). "Manchester United 2-1 Crystal Palace: Marcus Rashford helps hosts to
i13th straight home win". BBC Sport. Retrieved 4 February 2023. ^ McNulty,
iPhil
i(12 March 2023). "Man Utd 0-0 Southampton: Saints earn draw against 10-man
iMan
iUtd". BBC Sport. Retrieved 30 May 2023. ^ "Premier League Player Stats".
iRetrieved 30 May 2023. ^ a b "Casemiro". besoccer.com. Retrieved 16 August
i2022. ^ "Casemiro: We're gunning for the title". FIFA. 22 April 2011.
iArchived
ifrom the original on 11 June 2015. Retrieved 18 July 2011. ^ "Bolas na trave
inão resolvem: Brasil e Argentina ficam no zero em Córdoba" [Balls in the bar
ido not solve it: Brazil and Argentina stay blank in Córdoba] (in Portuguese).
iGlobo Esporte. 14 September 2011. Retrieved 19 December 2013. ^ "Oscar left
iout of Brazil's Copa America squad". Goal. 5 May 2015. Retrieved 16 March
i2016. ^ "Dunga convoca Seleção para a Copa América com 7 jogadores olímpicos"
i[Dunga calls up Seleção to the Copa América with seven Olympic players] (in
iPortuguese). Globo Esporte. 5 May 2016. Retrieved 10 May 2016. ^ "World Cup:
iNeymar named in Brazil's 23-man squad". BBC Sport. 14 May 2018. Retrieved 15
iMay 2018. ^ Reddy, Luke (17 June 2018). "Brazil 1–1 Switzerland". BBC Sport.
iRetrieved 17 June 2018. ^ "Brazil name Copa America squad". Football Italia.
iTiro Media. 17 May 2019. Retrieved 21 May 2019. ^ Clancy, Conor (22 June
i2019). "Casemiro suspended for Brazil's Copa America quarter-final". Marca.
iMadrid. Retrieved 1 July 2019. ^ Smyth, Rob (7 July 2019). "Brazil 3–1 Peru".
iThe Guardian. London. Retrieved 8 July 2019. ^ "Tite define convocados da
iSeleção Brasileira para a Copa América 2021" (in Portuguese). Brazilian
iFootball Confederation. 9 June 2021. Retrieved 9 June 2021. ^ "Casemiro gives
iBrazil controversial win". BBC Sport. 24 June 2021. Retrieved 24 June 2021. ^
iGraham, Bryan Armen (10 July 2021). "Argentina 1–0 Brazil: Copa América final
i– as it happened". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 13 July 2021. ^ "Seleção
iBrasileira está convocada para a Copa do Mundo FIFA Qatar 2022" (in
iPortuguese). CBF. 7 November 2022. Retrieved 7 November 2022. ^ "Casemiro
istunner ends Switzerland resistance to fire Brazil into last 16". The
iGuardian. London. 28 November 2022. ^ "World Cup quarter-final: Croatia 1–1
iBrazil (4–2 pens) – as it happened". The Guardian. London. 9 December 2022.
iRetrieved 17 December 2022. ^ Downie, Andrew (29 June 2018). "Favorites? If
iyou say so: Brazilian midfielder Casemiro". Reuters. Retrieved 28 September
i2019. ^ de Juan, Manu (7 November 2017). "Casemiro, more box-to-box than a
idefensive midfielder". Diario AS. Madrid. Retrieved 28 September 2019. ^ a b
ic
id "Casemiro put on a show for Real Madrid in the Champions League final". Fox
iSports. 29 May 2016. Retrieved 28 September 2019. ^ Bull, J.J. (13 September
i2017). "Isco is one of the world's best players on current form – what does
iit
imean for Gareth Bale's Real Madrid career?". The Daily Telegraph. London.
iArchived from the original on 12 January 2022. Retrieved 28 September 2019. ^
ia b c d Lowe, Sid (26 April 2016). "Casemiro: from 'chubby' sub to the rock
ion
iwhom Real Madrid now depend". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 28 September
i2019. ^ "Casemiro a Real hero, Messi inspires Barca, Atleti joy, Aspas' derby
idelight". ESPN. 20 March 2017. Retrieved 28 September 2019. ^ Terroba,
iPatricia (2 April 2017). "The Casemiro syndrome". Marca. Madrid. Retrieved 28
iSeptember 2019. ^ a b Train, Rob (14 August 2017). "Well-rounded Casemiro
iquickly becoming indispensable for Real Madrid". ESPN. Retrieved 28 September
i2019. ^ De la Riva, Mario (18 August 2019). "Real Madrid: Player-by-player
iverdicts as Celta Vigo beaten". Diario AS. Madrid. Retrieved 28 September
i2019. ^ a b Gatto, Riccardo (31 December 2011). "San Paolo, Cunha: "Casemiro?
iAl momento..."" [San Paolo, Cunha: "Casemiro? At the moment..."] (in
iItalian).
ituttomercatoweb.com. Retrieved 29 September 2019. ^ Gasparotto, Manlio (17
iAugust 2011). "Mondiale U20, occhio a Casemiro "Faccio tutto, difesa e
iattacco"" [U20 World Cup, look out for Casemiro "I do everything, defence and
iattack"]. La Gazzetta dello Sport (in Italian). Retrieved 29 September 2019.
i^
ia b Matchett, Karl (22 May 2017). "Ranking Every Player for Real Madrid in
i2016/17 Campaign". Bleacher Report. Retrieved 29 September 2019. ^ Cox,
iMichael (22 February 2019). "Fernandinho and Casemiro lead the game's most
iunderrated midfielders". ESPN. Retrieved 28 September 2019. ^ a b Roncero,
iTomás (9 March 2016). "The Casemiro effect". Diario AS. Madrid. Retrieved 28
iSeptember 2019. ^ Sobhani, Kiyan (26 September 2019). "Real Madrid Have
iSuddenly Become Defensively Compact – Good Timing Heading into The Madrid
iDerby". MSN. Retrieved 29 September 2019. ^ Siguero, Santiago (10 August
i2017). "Real Madrid's dynamic midfield core". Marca. Madrid. Retrieved 28
iSeptember 2019. ^ Alvarez, Eduardo (26 October 2015). "Casemiro's emergence
iis
ia credit to the player and his manager". ESPN. Retrieved 28 September 2019. ^
iHaugstad, Thore (1 April 2016). "The Casemiro conundrum: how much should Real
iMadrid value grit over quality?". FourFourTwo. Retrieved 28 September 2019. ^
iTrain, Rob (21 August 2016). "Toni Kroos stands out for Real Madrid in
idominant outing vs. La Real". ESPN. Retrieved 29 September 2019. ^
iSanchidrián
iSeguir, David F. (26 January 2019). "Casemiro: 93 passes with 92% accuracy
irate". Diario AS. Madrid. Retrieved 28 September 2019. ^ Matchett, Karl (3
iMay
i2016). "La Liga Team of the Week: Ivan Rakitic, Angel Correa and Casemiro
iImpress". Bleacher Report. ^ García, Javier (1 March 2018). "Casemiro,
iMadrid's standout ball-winner". Real Madrid CF. Retrieved 28 September 2019.
i^
iPolo, Pablo; Whelan, Padraig (4 June 2017). "Three out of three for Casemiro
iin the Champions League". Marca. Madrid. Retrieved 28 September 2019. ^
i"Casemiro: Madrid owed fans". Football España. 4 April 2016. Retrieved 28
iSeptember 2019. ^ Polo, Pablo; Friend, Robson (21 July 2017). "Indispensable
iCasemiro ready to fight off competitors". Marca. Madrid. Retrieved 28
iSeptember 2019. ^ "Casemiro: "No cambiaré, en 100 partidos no me han
iexpulsado..."" [Casemiro: "I won't change, in 100 matches they haven't sent
ime
ioff..."]. Diario AS (in Spanish). Madrid. 18 May 2017. Retrieved 28 September
i2019. ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t "Casemiro: Summary".
iSoccerway. Perform Group. Retrieved 30 December 2022. ^ For Taça de Portugal
ithird round: "FC Porto 1–3 Sporting". SAPO Desporto (in Portuguese).
iRetrieved
i30 December 2022. ^ "Games played by Casemiro in 2022/2023". Soccerbase.
iCenturycomm. Retrieved 3 June 2023. ^ a b "Casemiro >> Internationals".
iworldfootball.net. Retrieved 6 April 2023. ^ "Peru vs. Brazil 0–5: Summary".
iSoccerway. Perform Group. Retrieved 30 December 2022. ^ "Brazil vs. Colombia
i2–2: Summary". Soccerway. Perform Group. Retrieved 30 December 2022. ^
i"Brazil
ivs. Nigeria 1–1: Summary". Soccerway. Perform Group. Retrieved 30 December
i2022. ^ "Brazil vs. Colombia 2–1: Summary". Soccerway. Perform Group.
iRetrieved 30 December 2022. ^ "Ecuador vs. Brazil 1–1: Summary". Soccerway.
iPerform Group. Retrieved 30 December 2022. ^ "Brazil vs. Switzerland 1–0:
iSummary". Soccerway. Perform Group. Retrieved 30 December 2022. ^ "Morocco
ivs.
iBrazil 2–1: Summary". Soccerway. Perform Group. Retrieved 25 March 2023. ^
i"De
iMadri a Itabaiana: o destino dos campeões de 2010 pelo São Paulo".
iGloboEsporte (in Portuguese). 24 January 2018. Retrieved 17 June 2023. ^
i"Real
iMadrid 2016–17: Squad". BDFutbol. Retrieved 30 December 2022. ^ "Real Madrid
i2019–20: Squad". BDFutbol. Retrieved 30 December 2022. ^ "Real Madrid
i2021–22:
iSquad". BDFutbol. Retrieved 30 December 2022. ^ "Acta del Partido celebrado
iel
i16 de abril de 2014, en Valencia" [Minutes of the Match held on 16 April
i2014,
iin Valencia] (in Spanish). Royal Spanish Football Federation. Retrieved 30
iDecember 2022. ^ "Acta del Partido celebrado el 13 de agosto de 2017, en
iBarcelona" [Minutes of the Match held on 13 August 2017, in Barcelona] (in
iSpanish). Royal Spanish Football Federation. Retrieved 30 December 2022.
i"Acta
idel Partido celebrado el 16 de agosto de 2017, en Madrid" [Minutes of the
iMatch held on 16 August 2017, in Madrid] (in Spanish). Royal Spanish Football
iFederation. Retrieved 30 December 2022. ^ "Acta del Partido celebrado el 12
ide
ienero de 2020, en Jeddah, Arabia Saudí" [Minutes of the Match held on 12
iJanuary 2020, in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia] (in Spanish). Royal Spanish Football
iFederation. Retrieved 30 December 2022. ^ "Acta del Partido celebrado el 16
ide
ienero de 2022, en Prince Bandar Ibn Abd Al Aziz, Riad, 13233, Arabia Saudí"
i[Minutes of the Match held on 16 January 2022, in Prince Bandar Ibn Abd Al
iAziz, 13233, Saudi Arabia] (in Spanish). Royal Spanish Football Federation.
iRetrieved 30 December 2022. ^ "Players with most Champions League titles:
iBenzema, Carvajal and Modrić equal Cristiano Ronaldo's record". UEFA. 28 May
i2022. Retrieved 30 December 2022. Kroos and Casemiro actually have five UEFA
iChampions League titles to their name but took part in only four finals,
imissing out in 2013 and 2014 respectively, while Bale, Isco and Marcelo have
ialso appeared in four final wins having remained on the bench for the 2022
idecider. ^ Johnston, Neil (28 May 2016). "Real Madrid 1–1 Atlético Madrid".
iBBC Sport. Retrieved 30 December 2022. ^ McNulty, Phil (3 June 2017).
i"Juventus 1–4 Real Madrid". BBC Sport. Retrieved 30 December 2022. ^ McNulty,
iPhil (26 May 2018). "Real Madrid 3–1 Liverpool". BBC Sport. Retrieved 30
iDecember 2022. ^ McNulty, Phil (28 May 2022). "Liverpool 0–1 Real Madrid".
iBBC
iSport. Retrieved 30 December 2022. ^ "Real Madrid 3–2 Sevilla". BBC Sport. 9
iAugust 2016. Retrieved 30 December 2022. ^ Jurejko, Jonathan (8 August 2017).
i"Real Madrid 2–1 Manchester United". BBC Sport. Retrieved 30 December 2022. ^
iBysouth, Alex (10 August 2022). "Real Madrid 2–0 Eintracht Frankfurt". BBC
iSport. Retrieved 30 December 2022. ^ "Match report: Real Madrid, C.F. –
iKashima Antlers". FIFA. Archived from the original on 28 March 2019. ^ "Real
iMadrid 1–0 Grêmio". BBC Sport. 16 December 2017. Retrieved 30 December 2022.
i^
i"Real Madrid 4–1 Al Ain". BBC Sport. 22 December 2018. Retrieved 30 December
i2022. ^ McNulty, Phil (26 February 2023). "Manchester United 2–0 Newcastle
iUnited". BBC Sport. Retrieved 26 February 2023. ^ McNulty, Phil (3 June
i2023).
i"Manchester City 2–1 Manchester United". BBC Sport. Retrieved 3 June 2023. ^
i"Brazil 3–1 Peru". BBC Sport. 7 July 2019. Retrieved 9 July 2019. ^ "UEFA
iChampions League squad of the season". UEFA. 5 June 2017. Retrieved 6 June
i2017. ^ "UEFA Champions League Squad of the Season". UEFA. 27 May 2018.
iRetrieved 27 May 2018. ^ "La UEFA se olvida de Oblak en sus equipo ideal de
ila
iLiga". Mundo Deportivo. Barcelona. 22 July 2020. ^ "Uno por uno, el equipo
iideal de la CONMEBOL Copa América 2021 elegido por el GET" (in Spanish). Copa
iAmérica. 13 July 2021. Archived from the original on 14 July 2021. Retrieved
i13 July 2021. ^ "Casemiro awarded EFE Trophy for the Best Ibero-American
iPlayer in 2020". Real Madrid CF. 18 February 2021. Retrieved 13 April 2023. ^
iSegar, David (27 February 2023). "Casemiro wins the battle of Brazil in
imidfield as Man Utd edge Newcastle in EFL Cup final". KeepUp.com.au.
iAustralian Professional Leagues Company. Retrieved 27 February 2023. ...man
iof
ithe match Casemiro largely to thank. ^ "Messi makes World 11 history as
iBenzema earns maiden inclusion". FIFA. Fédération Internationale de Football
iAssociation. 27 February 2023. Retrieved 27 February 2023.
i
i===== External links =====
i
iWikimedia Commons has media related to Casemiro.
i
iv t e
i
iManchester United F.C. – current squad
i
i1 De Gea 2 Lindelöf 4 Jones 5 Maguire 6 Martínez 8 Fernandes 9 Martial 10
iRashford 11 Greenwood 12 Malacia 14 Eriksen 15 Sabitzer 17 Fred 18 Casemiro
i19
iVarane 20 Dalot 21 Antony 22 Heaton 23 Shaw 25 Sancho 27 Weghorst 28
iPellistri
i29 Wan-Bissaka 30 Bishop 33 Williams 34 Van de Beek 35 Huddlestone 36 Elanga
i39 McTominay 43 Mengi 49 Garnacho 51 Savage 55 Iqbal 57 Emeran 63 Jurado 64
iHardley 68 Hansen-Aarøen 73 Mainoo 75 Norkett Manager: Ten Hag
i
iBrazil squads
i
iv t e
i
iBrazil squad – 2015 Copa América
i
i1 Jefferson 2 Dani Alves 3 Miranda 4 David Luiz 5 Fernandinho 6 Filipe Luís 7
iDouglas Costa 8 Elias 9 Tardelli 10 Neymar (c) 11 Firmino 12 Neto 13
iMarquinhos 14 Thiago Silva 15 Geferson 16 Fabinho 17 Fred 18 Ribeiro 19
iWillian 20 Robinho 21 Coutinho 22 Casemiro 23 Grohe Coach: Dunga
i
iv t e
i
iBrazil squad – Copa América Centenario
i
i1 Alisson 2 Dani Alves 3 Miranda (c) 4 Gil 5 Casemiro 6 Filipe Luís 7 Ganso 8
iElias 9 Jonas 10 Lucas Lima 11 Gabriel 12 Diego Alves 13 Marquinhos 14
iRodrigo
iCaio 15 Fabinho 16 Douglas Santos 17 Walace 18 Renato Augusto 19 Willian 20
iLucas 21 Hulk 22 Coutinho 23 M. Grohe Coach: Dunga
i
iv t e
i
iBrazil squad – 2018 FIFA World Cup
i
i1 Alisson 2 Thiago Silva 3 Miranda (c) 4 Geromel 5 Casemiro 6 Filipe Luís 7
iDouglas Costa 8 Renato Augusto 9 Gabriel Jesus 10 Neymar 11 Coutinho 12
iMarcelo 13 Marquinhos 14 Danilo 15 Paulinho 16 Cássio 17 Fernandinho 18 Fred
i19 Willian 20 Firmino 21 Taison 22 Fagner 23 Ederson Coach: Tite
i
iv t e
i
iBrazil squad – 2019 Copa América winners (9th title)
i
i1 Alisson 2 Thiago Silva 3 Miranda 4 Marquinhos 5 Casemiro 6 Filipe Luís 7
iDavid Neres 8 Arthur 9 Gabriel Jesus 10 Willian 11 Coutinho 12 Alex Sandro 13
iDani Alves (c) 14 Militão 15 Allan 16 Cássio 17 Fernandinho 18 Paquetá 19
iEverton 20 Firmino 21 Richarlison 22 Fagner 23 Ederson Coach: Tite
i
iv t e
i
iBrazil squad – 2021 Copa América runners-up
i
i1 Alisson 2 Danilo 3 Thiago Silva (c) 4 Marquinhos 5 Casemiro 6 Alex Sandro 7
iRicharlison 8 Fred 9 Gabriel Jesus 10 Neymar 11 Ribeiro 12 Weverton 13
iEmerson
i14 Militão 15 Fabinho 16 Lodi 17 Paquetá 18 Vinícius Jr. 19 Everton 20
iFirmino
i21 Gabriel 22 Felipe / Léo Ortiz a 23 Ederson 25 Douglas Luiz Coach: Tite
i
ia Léo Ortiz replaced Felipe after Brazil's fourth match.
i
iv t e
i
iBrazil squad – 2022 FIFA World Cup
i
i1 Alisson 2 Danilo 3 Thiago Silva (c) 4 Marquinhos 5 Casemiro 6 Alex Sandro 7
iPaquetá 8 Fred 9 Richarlison 10 Neymar 11 Raphinha 12 Weverton 13 Dani Alves
i14 Militão 15 Fabinho 16 Telles 17 Bruno Guimarães 18 Gabriel Jesus 19 Antony
i20 Vinícius Jr. 21 Rodrygo 22 Ribeiro 23 Ederson 24 Bremer 25 Pedro 26
iMartinelli Coach: Tite
i
iAwards
i
iv t e
i
i2021 Copa América Team of the Tournament
i
iEmiliano Martínez
i
iPervis Estupiñán Marquinhos Cristian Romero Mauricio Isla
i
iYoshimar Yotún Casemiro Rodrigo De Paul
i
iLuis Díaz Neymar Lionel Messi
i
iv t e
i
i1990–91: Fernández 1991–92: Zalazar 1992–93: Zamorano 1993–94: Romário
i1994–95: Zamorano 1995–96: Simeone 1996–97: Ronaldo 1997–98: Roberto Carlos
i1998–99: Rivaldo 1999–2000: Herrera 2000–01: Acuña 2001–02: Saviola 2002–03:
iRonaldo 2003–04: Ronaldinho 2004–05: Forlán 2005–06: Aimar 2006–07: Messi
i2007–08: Agüero 2008–09: Messi 2009–10: Messi 2010–11: Messi 2011–12: Messi
i2012–13: C. Ronaldo 2013–14: Diego Costa 2014–15: Suárez 2015–16: Navas
i2016–17: Real Madrid 2017–18: Cavani 2018–19: not awarded 2019–20: Santos &
iCasemiro 2020–21: Suárez 2021–22: Vinicius Jr.
i
iv t e
i
i2009: Xavi 2010: Xavi 2011: Xavi 2012: Alonso 2013: Illarramendi 2014: Modrić
i2015: Rodríguez 2016: Modrić 2017: Kroos 2018: Kroos 2019: Parejo 2020:
iCasemiro 2021: Casemiro
i
iv t e
i
i1990: Walker 1991: Pearson 1992: McClair 1993: Merson 1994: Richardson 1995:
iMcManaman 1996: Townsend 1997: Walsh 1998: Wise 1999: Nielsen 2000: Elliott
i2001: Fowler 2002: Friedel 2003: Dudek 2004: Zenden 2005: Terry 2006: Rooney
i2007: Drogba 2008: Woodgate 2009: Foster 2010: Valencia 2011: Foster 2012:
iDowning 2013: Dyer 2014: Nasri 2015: Terry 2016: Kompany 2017: Ibrahimović
i2018: Kompany 2019: Silva 2020: Foden 2021: Mahrez 2022: Van Dijk 2023:
iCasemiro
i
iRetrieved from
i"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Casemiro&oldid=1160842177"
i
iCategories: 1992 births Living people People from São José dos Campos
iFootballers from São Paulo (state) Brazilian footballers Men's association
ifootball midfielders São Paulo FC players Real Madrid Castilla footballers
iReal Madrid CF players FC Porto players Manchester United F.C. players
iCampeonato Brasileiro Série A players Segunda División players La Liga
iplayers
iPrimeira Liga players Premier League players UEFA Champions League winning
iplayers Brazil men's youth international footballers Brazil men's under-20
iinternational footballers Brazil men's international footballers 2015 Copa
iAmérica players Copa América Centenario players 2018 FIFA World Cup players
i2019 Copa América players 2021 Copa América players 2022 FIFA World Cup
iplayers Copa América-winning players Brazilian expatriate footballers
iExpatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Portugal
iExpatriate footballers in Spain Brazilian expatriate sportspeople in England
iBrazilian expatriate sportspeople in Portugal Brazilian expatriate
isportspeople in Spain
i
iHidden categories: CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) CS1 Portuguese-language
isources (pt) CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Articles with short
idescription
iShort description is different from Wikidata EngvarB from December 2022 Use
idmy dates from February 2023 Articles using Template:Medal with Winner
iArticles using Template:Medal with Runner-up Commons category link from
iWikidata Pages using national squad without sport or team link
i
i
i
i  ------------- SOURCE ----------------
i
iURL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Casemiro
i
iLICENSE: Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike
i
i=========================================
i
i
i$
Bt:Casemiro - Wikipedia	/x/w/g/https_58__47__47_en_46_wikipedia_46_org_47_wiki_47_Casemiro	texopher.com	70
