i
1[?] Read Details	/x/w/gd/https_58__47__47_en_46_wikipedia_46_org_47_wiki_47_Elon_95_Musk	texopher.com	70
i
i===== Contents =====
i
iElon Reeve Musk (/ˈiːlɒn/ EE-lon; born June 28, 1971) is a business magnate
iand investor. He is the founder, CEO and chief engineer of SpaceX; angel
iinvestor, CEO and product architect of Tesla, Inc.; owner, CTO and chairman
iof
iTwitter; founder of the Boring Company and X Corp.; co-founder of Neuralink
iand OpenAI; and president of the philanthropic Musk Foundation. Musk is the
iwealthiest person in the world according to the Bloomberg Billionaires Index
iand Forbes's Real Time Billionaires list as of June 2023, primarily from his
iownership stakes in Tesla and SpaceX, with an estimated net worth of around
i$225 billion according to Bloomberg and $235 billion according to
iForbes.[4][5][6]
i
iMusk was born in Pretoria, South Africa, and briefly attended the University
iof Pretoria before moving to Canada at age 18, acquiring citizenship through
ihis Canadian-born mother. Two years later, he matriculated at Queen's
iUniversity and transferred to the University of Pennsylvania, where he
ireceived bachelor's degrees in economics and physics. He moved to California
iin 1995 to attend Stanford University. After two days, he dropped out and,
iwith his brother Kimbal, co-founded the online city guide software company
iZip2. In 1999, Zip2 was acquired by Compaq for $307 million and Musk
ico-founded X.com, a direct bank. X.com merged with Confinity in 2000 to form
iPayPal, which eBay acquired for $1.5 billion in 2002.
i
iWith $175.8 million, Musk founded SpaceX in 2002, a spaceflight services
icompany. In 2004, he was an early investor in the electric vehicle
imanufacturer Tesla Motors, Inc. (now Tesla, Inc.). He became its chairman and
iproduct architect, assuming the position of CEO in 2008. In 2006, he helped
icreate SolarCity, a solar energy company that was later acquired by Tesla and
ibecame Tesla Energy. In 2015, he co-founded OpenAI, a nonprofit artificial
iintelligence research company. The following year, he co-founded Neuralink—a
ineurotechnology company developing brain–computer interfaces—and the Boring
iCompany, a tunnel construction company. Musk has also proposed a hyperloop
ihigh-speed vactrain transportation system. In 2022, his acquisition of
iTwitter
ifor $44 billion was completed.
i
iMusk has expressed views that have made him a polarizing figure. He has been
icriticized for making unscientific and misleading statements, including that
iof spreading COVID-19 misinformation. In 2018, the U.S. Securities and
iExchange Commission (SEC) sued Musk for falsely tweeting that he had secured
ifunding for a private takeover of Tesla. Musk stepped down as chairman of
iTesla and paid a $20 million fine as part of a settlement agreement with the
iSEC.
i
i===== Early life =====
i
iElon Reeve Musk was born on June 28, 1971, in Pretoria, one of South Africa's
icapital cities.[7][8] Musk has British and Pennsylvania Dutch
iancestry.[9][10]
iHis mother is Maye Musk (née Haldeman), a model and dietitian born in
iSaskatchewan, Canada, and raised in South Africa.[11][12][13] His father,
iErrol Musk, is a South African electromechanical engineer, pilot, sailor,
iconsultant, and property developer, who partly owned a Zambian emerald mine
inear Lake Tanganyika.[14][15][16][17] Musk has a younger brother, Kimbal, and
ia younger sister, Tosca.[13][18]
i
iMusk's family was wealthy during his youth.[17] His father was elected to the
iPretoria City Council as a representative of the anti-apartheid Progressive
iParty and has said that his children shared their father's dislike of
iapartheid.[7] His maternal grandfather, Joshua Haldeman, was an American-born
iCanadian who took his family on record-breaking journeys to Africa and
iAustralia in a single-engine Bellanca airplane.[19][20][21] After his parents
idivorced in 1980, Musk chose to mostly live with his father.[9] Musk
iregretted
ihis decision and has become estranged from his father.[22] He has a paternal
ihalf-sister and a half-brother.[19][23]
i
iMaye Musk has said of her son that he "was shy and awkward at school" and
i"didn't have many friends".[24] At age ten, he developed an interest in
icomputing and video games, teaching himself how to program from the VIC-20
iuser manual.[25] At age twelve, he sold his BASIC-based game Blastar to PC
iand
iOffice Technology magazine for approximately $500.[26][27]
i
iMusk attended Waterkloof House Preparatory School, Bryanston High School, and
iPretoria Boys High School, from which he graduated.[28] Musk applied for a
iCanadian passport through his Canadian-born mother,[29][30] knowing that it
iwould be easier to immigrate to the United States this way.[31] While waiting
ifor his application to be processed, he attended the University of Pretoria
ifor five months.[32]
i
iMusk arrived in Canada in June 1989 and lived with a second cousin in
iSaskatchewan for a year,[33] working odd jobs at a farm and lumber mill.[34]
iIn 1990, he entered Queen's University in Kingston, Ontario.[35][36] Two
iyears
ilater, he transferred to the University of Pennsylvania (UPenn), where he
icompleted studies for a Bachelor of Arts degree in physics and a Bachelor of
iScience degree in economics from the Wharton School.[37][38][39][40] Although
iMusk claims he earned the degrees in 1995, UPenn maintains it awarded them in
i1997.[41] He reportedly hosted large, ticketed house parties to help pay for
ituition, and wrote a business plan for an electronic book-scanning service
isimilar to Google Books.[42]
i
iIn 1994, Musk held two internships in Silicon Valley: one at the energy
istorage startup Pinnacle Research Institute, which investigated electrolytic
iultracapacitors for energy storage, and another at the Palo Alto–based
istartup
iRocket Science Games.[43][44] In 1995, he was accepted to a PhD program in
imaterials science at Stanford University.[45][46] However, Musk decided to
ijoin the Internet boom, instead dropping out two days after being accepted
iand
iapplied for a job at Netscape, to which he reportedly never received a
iresponse.[47][29]
i
i===== Business career =====
i
iIn 1995, Musk, his brother Kimbal, and Greg Kouri founded Zip2.[48][49] Errol
iMusk provided them with $28,000 in funding.[50] The company developed an
iInternet city guide with maps, directions, and yellow pages, and marketed it
ito newspapers.[51] They worked at a small rented office in Palo Alto,[52]
iMusk
icoding the website every night.[52] Eventually, Zip2 obtained contracts with
iThe New York Times and the Chicago Tribune.[42] The brothers persuaded the
iboard of directors to abandon a merger with CitySearch;[53] however, Musk's
iattempts to become CEO were thwarted.[54] Compaq acquired Zip2 for $307
imillion in cash in February 1999,[55][56] and Musk received $22 million for
ihis 7-percent share.[57]
i
iLater in 1999, Musk co-founded X.com, an online financial services and e-mail
ipayment company.[58] X.com was one of the first federally insured online
ibanks, and over 200,000 customers joined in its initial months of
ioperation.[59] Even though Musk founded the company, investors regarded him
ias
iinexperienced and replaced him with Intuit CEO Bill Harris by the end of the
iyear.[60]
i
iIn 2000, X.com merged with online bank Confinity to avoid
icompetition,[52][60][61] as Confinity's money-transfer service PayPal was
imore
ipopular than X.com's service.[62] Musk then returned as CEO of the merged
icompany. His preference for Microsoft over Unix-based software caused a rift
iamong the company's employees, and led Peter Thiel, Confinity's founder, to
iresign.[63] With the company suffering from compounding technological issues
iand the lack of a cohesive business model, the board ousted Musk and replaced
ihim with Thiel in September 2000.[64][b] Under Thiel, the company focused on
ithe money-transfer service and was renamed PayPal in 2001.[66][67]
i
iIn 2002, PayPal was acquired by eBay for $1.5 billion in stock, of which
iMusk—the largest shareholder with 11.72% of shares—received $175.8
imillion.[68][69] In 2017, more than 15 years later, Musk purchased the X.com
idomain from PayPal for its "sentimental value".[70][71] In 2022, Musk
idiscussed a goal of creating "X, the everything app".[72]
i
iIn early 2001, Musk became involved with the nonprofit Mars Society and
idiscussed funding plans to place a growth-chamber for plants on Mars.[73] In
iOctober of the same year, he traveled to Moscow with Jim Cantrell and Adeo
iRessi to buy refurbished intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs) that
icould send the greenhouse payloads into space. He met with the companies NPO
iLavochkin and Kosmotras; however, Musk was seen as a novice[74] and the group
ireturned to the United States empty-handed. In February 2002, the group
ireturned to Russia with Mike Griffin (president of In-Q-Tel) to look for
ithree
iICBMs. They had another meeting with Kosmotras and were offered one rocket
ifor
i$8 million, which Musk rejected. He instead decided to start a company that
icould build affordable rockets.[74] With $100 million of his own money,[75]
iMusk founded SpaceX in May 2002 and became the company's CEO and Chief
iEngineer.[76][77]
i
iSpaceX attempted its first launch of the Falcon 1 rocket in 2006.[78] Though
ithe rocket failed to reach Earth orbit, it was awarded a Commercial Orbital
iTransportation Services program contract from NASA Administrator (and former
iSpaceX consultant[79]) Mike Griffin later that year.[80][81] After two more
ifailed attempts that nearly caused Musk and his companies to go bankrupt,[78]
iSpaceX succeeded in launching the Falcon 1 into orbit in 2008.[82] Later that
iyear, SpaceX received a $1.6 billion Commercial Resupply Services contract
ifrom NASA for 12 flights of its Falcon 9 rocket and Dragon spacecraft to the
iInternational Space Station, replacing the Space Shuttle after its 2011
iretirement.[83] In 2012, the Dragon vehicle docked with the ISS, a first for
ia
icommercial spacecraft.[84]
i
iWorking towards its goal of reusable rockets, in 2015 SpaceX successfully
ilanded the first stage of a Falcon 9 on an inland platform.[85] Later
ilandings
iwere achieved on autonomous spaceport drone ships, an ocean-based recovery
iplatform.[86] In 2018, SpaceX launched the Falcon Heavy; the inaugural
imission
icarried Musk's personal Tesla Roadster as a dummy payload.[87][88] Since
i2019,[89] SpaceX has been developing Starship, a fully-reusable,
isuper-heavy-lift launch vehicle intended to replace the Falcon 9 and the
iFalcon Heavy.[90] In 2020, SpaceX launched its first crewed flight, the
iDemo-2, becoming the first private company to place astronauts into orbit and
idock a crewed spacecraft with the ISS.[91]
i
iIn 2015, SpaceX began development of the Starlink constellation of
ilow-Earth-orbit satellites to provide satellite Internet access,[92] with the
ifirst two prototype satellites launched in February 2018. A second set of
itest
isatellites, and the first large deployment of a piece of the constellation,
ioccurred in May 2019, when the first 60 operational satellites were
ilaunched.[93] The total cost of the decade-long project to design, build, and
ideploy the constellation is estimated by SpaceX to be about $10
ibillion.[94][c] Some critics, including the International Astronomical Union,
ihave alleged that Starlink blocks the view of the sky and poses a collision
ithreat to spacecraft.[97][98][99]
i
iDuring the Russian invasion of Ukraine, Musk sent Starlink terminals to
iUkraine to provide Internet access and communication.[100] However, Musk
irefused to block Russian state media on Starlink, declaring himself "a free
ispeech absolutist".[101][102] In October 2022, Musk stated that about 20,000
isatellite terminals had been donated to Ukraine, together with free data
itransfer subscriptions, which cost SpaceX $80 million. After asking the
iUnited
iStates Department of Defense to pay for further units and future
isubscriptions
ion behalf of Ukraine,[103] Musk publicly stated that SpaceX would continue to
iprovide Starlink to Ukraine for free, at a yearly cost to itself of $400
imillion.[104][105][106]
i
iTesla, Inc.—originally Tesla Motors—was incorporated in 2003 by Martin
iEberhard and Marc Tarpenning, who financed the company until the Series A
iround of funding. Both men played active roles in the company's early
idevelopment prior to Musk's involvement.[107] Musk led the Series A round of
iinvestment in February 2004; he invested $6.5 million, became the majority
ishareholder, and joined Tesla's board of directors as chairman.[108] Musk
itook
ian active role within the company and oversaw Roadster product design but was
inot deeply involved in day-to-day business operations.[109]
i
iFollowing a series of escalating conflicts in 2007, and the financial crisis
iof 2007–2008, Eberhard was ousted from the firm.[110][page needed][111] Musk
iassumed leadership of the company as CEO and product architect in 2008.[112]
iA
i2009 lawsuit settlement with Eberhard designated Musk as a Tesla co-founder,
ialong with Tarpenning and two others.[113][114] As of 2019, Musk was the
ilongest-tenured CEO of any automotive manufacturer globally.[115] In 2021,
iMusk nominally changed his title to "Technoking" while retaining his position
ias CEO.[116]
i
iTesla first built an electric sports car, the Roadster, in 2008. With sales
iof about 2,500 vehicles, it was the first serial production all-electric car
ito use lithium-ion battery cells.[117] Tesla began delivery of its four-door
iModel S sedan in 2012.[118] A cross-over, the Model X was launched in
i2015.[119] A mass-market sedan, the Model 3, was released in 2017.[120] The
iModel 3 is the all-time bestselling plug-in electric car worldwide, and in
iJune 2021 it became the first electric car to sell 1 million units
iglobally.[121][122] A fifth vehicle, the Model Y crossover, was launched in
i2020.[123] The Cybertruck, an all-electric pickup truck, was unveiled in
i2019.[124] Under Musk, Tesla has also constructed multiple lithium-ion
ibattery
iand electric vehicle factories, named Gigafactories.[125]
i
iSince its initial public offering in 2010,[126] Tesla stock has risen
isignificantly; it became the most valuable carmaker in summer 2020,[127][128]
iand it entered the S&P 500 later that year.[129][130] In October 2021, it
ireached a market capitalization of $1 trillion, the sixth company in U.S.
ihistory to do so.[131] In November 2021, Musk proposed, on Twitter, to sell
i10% of his Tesla stock, since "much is made lately of unrealized gains being
ia
imeans of tax avoidance".[132] After more than 3.5 million Twitter accounts
isupported the sale, Musk sold $6.9 billion of Tesla stock within a week,[132]
iand a total of $16.4 billion by year end, reaching the 10% target.[133] In
iFebruary 2022, The Wall Street Journal reported that both Elon and Kimbal
iMusk
iwere under investigation by the SEC for possible insider trading related to
ithe sale.[134] In 2022, Musk unveiled a robot developed by Tesla,
iOptimus.[135]
i
iIn 2018, Musk was sued by the SEC for a tweet claiming that funding had been
isecured for potentially taking Tesla private.[136][d] The lawsuit
icharacterized the tweet as false, misleading, and damaging to investors, and
isought to bar Musk from serving as CEO of publicly traded
icompanies.[136][140][141] Two days later, Musk settled with the SEC, without
iadmitting or denying the SEC's allegations. As a result, Musk and Tesla were
ifined $20 million each, and Musk was forced to step down for three years as
iTesla chairman but was able to remain as CEO.[142] Musk has stated in
iinterviews that he does not regret posting the tweet that triggered the SEC
iinvestigation.[143][144] In April 2022, the shareholder who sued Musk over
ithe
itweet, along with several Tesla shareholders, said that a federal judge had
iruled that the tweet was false, although the ruling in question has not been
iunsealed.[145] In February 2023, the jury found Musk and Tesla not
iliable.[146]
i
iIn 2019, Musk stated in a tweet that Tesla would build half a million cars
ithat year.[147] The SEC reacted to Musk's tweet by filing in court, asking
ithe
icourt to hold him in contempt for violating the terms of a settlement
iagreement with such a tweet; the accusation was disputed by Musk. This was
ieventually settled by a joint agreement between Musk and the SEC clarifying
ithe previous agreement details.[148] The agreement included a list of topics
ithat Musk would need preclearance before tweeting about.[149] In 2020, a
ijudge
iprevented a lawsuit from proceeding that claimed a tweet by Musk regarding
iTesla stock price ("too high imo") violated the agreement.[150][151]
iFOIA-released records showed that the SEC itself concluded Musk has
isubsequently violated the agreement twice by tweeting regarding "Tesla's
isolar
iroof production volumes and its stock price".[152]
i
iMusk provided the initial concept and financial capital for SolarCity, which
ihis cousins Lyndon and Peter Rive founded in 2006.[153] By 2013, SolarCity
iwas
ithe second largest provider of solar power systems in the United States.[154]
iIn 2014, Musk promoted the idea of SolarCity building an advanced production
ifacility in Buffalo, New York, triple the size of the largest solar plant in
ithe United States.[155] Construction of the factory started in 2014 and was
icompleted in 2017. It operated as a joint venture with Panasonic until early
i2020.[156][157]
i
iTesla acquired SolarCity for over $2 billion in 2016 and merged it with its
ibattery unit to create Tesla Energy. The deal's announcement resulted in a
imore than 10% drop in Tesla's stock price. At the time, SolarCity was facing
iliquidity issues.[158] Multiple shareholder groups filed a lawsuit against
iMusk and Tesla's directors, claiming that the purchase of SolarCity was done
isolely to benefit Musk and came at the expense of Tesla and its
ishareholders.[159][160] Tesla directors settled the lawsuit in January 2020,
ileaving Musk the sole remaining defendant.[161][162] Two years later, the
icourt ruled in Musk's favor.[163]
i
iIn 2016, Musk co-founded Neuralink, a neurotechnology startup company, with
ian investment of $100 million.[164][165] Neuralink aims to integrate the
ihuman
ibrain with artificial intelligence (AI) by creating devices that are embedded
iin the brain to facilitate its merging with machines. Such technology could
ienhance memory or allow the devices to communicate with software.[165][166]
iThe company also hopes to develop devices with which to treat neurological
iconditions such as Alzheimer's disease, dementia, and spinal cord
iinjuries.[167]
i
iIn 2019, Musk announced work on a device akin to a sewing machine that could
iembed threads into a human brain.[164] Musk is listed as the sole author of
ian
iOctober 2019 paper that details some of Neuralink's research,[168] although
iMusk's being listed as such rankled the Neuralink team's researchers.[169] At
ia 2020 live demonstration, Musk described one of their early devices as "a
iFitbit in your skull" that could soon cure paralysis, deafness, blindness,
iand
iother disabilities. Many neuroscientists and publications criticized these
iclaims,[170][171][172] with MIT Technology Review describing them as "highly
ispeculative" and "neuroscience theater".[170] During the demonstration, Musk
irevealed a pig with a Neuralink implant that tracked neural activity related
ito smell.[167] In 2022, Neuralink announced that clinical trials would begin
iby the end of the year.[173]
i
iNeuralink has conducted further animal testing on macaque monkeys at the
iUniversity of California, Davis' Primate Research Center. In 2021, the
icompany
ireleased a video in which a Macaque played the video game Pong via a
iNeuralink
iimplant. The company's animal trials—which have caused the deaths of some
imonkeys—have led to claims of animal cruelty. The Physicians Committee for
iResponsible Medicine has alleged that Neuralink's animal trials have violated
ithe Animal Welfare Act.[174] Employees have complained that pressure from
iMusk
ito accelerate development has led to botched experiments and unnecessary
ianimal deaths. In 2022, a federal probe was launched into possible animal
iwelfare violations by Neuralink.[175]
i
iIn 2017, Musk founded the Boring Company to construct tunnels and revealed
iplans for specialized, underground, high-occupancy vehicles that could travel
iup to 150 miles per hour (240 km/h) and thus circumvent above-ground traffic
iin major cities.[176][177] Early in 2017, the company began discussions with
iregulatory bodies and initiated construction of a 30-foot (9.1 m) wide,
i50-foot (15 m) long, and 15-foot (4.6 m) deep "test trench" on the premises
iof
iSpaceX's offices, as that required no permits.[178] The Los Angeles tunnel,
iless than two miles (3.2 km) in length, debuted to journalists in 2018. It
iused Tesla Model X's and was reported to be a rough ride while traveling at
isuboptimal speeds.[179]
i
iTwo tunnel projects announced in 2018, in Chicago and West Los Angeles, have
ibeen canceled.[180][181] However, a tunnel beneath the Las Vegas Convention
iCenter was completed in early 2021.[182] Local officials have approved
ifurther
iexpansions of the tunnel system.[183] In 2021, tunnel construction was
iapproved for Fort Lauderdale, Florida.[184]
i
iI made an offer https://sec.gov/Archives/edgar...
i
iApril 14, 2022[185]
i
iMusk expressed interest in buying Twitter as early as 2017,[186] and had
ipreviously questioned the platform's commitment to freedom of
ispeech.[187][188] In January 2022, Musk started purchasing Twitter shares,
ireaching a 9.2% stake by April,[189] making him the largest
ishareholder.[190][e] When this was publicly disclosed, Twitter shares
iexperienced the largest intraday price surge since the company's 2013
iIPO.[192] On April 4, Musk agreed to a deal that would appoint him to
iTwitter's board of directors and prohibit him from acquiring more than 14.9%
iof the company.[193][194] However, on April 13, Musk made a $43 billion offer
ito buy Twitter, launching a takeover bid to buy 100% of Twitter's stock at
i$54.20 per share.[190][195] In response, Twitter's board adopted a "poison
ipill" shareholder rights plan to make it more expensive for any single
iinvestor to own more than 15% of the company without board approval.[196]
iNevertheless, by the end of the month Musk had successfully concluded his bid
ifor approximately $44 billion.[197] This included about $12.5 billion in
iloans
iagainst his Tesla stock and $21 billion in equity financing.[198][199]
i
iTesla's stock market value sank by over $100 billion the next day in reaction
ito the deal, causing Musk to lose around $30 billion of his net
iworth.[200][201] He subsequently tweeted criticism of Twitter executive
iVijaya
iGadde's policies to his 86 million followers, which led to some of them
iengaging in sexist and racist harassment against her.[202] Exactly a month
iafter announcing the takeover, Musk stated that the deal was "on hold"
ifollowing a report that 5% of Twitter's daily active users were spam
iaccounts,[203] causing Twitter shares to drop more than 10 percent.[204]
iAlthough he initially affirmed his commitment to the acquisition,[205] he
isent
inotification of his termination of the deal in July; Twitter's Board of
iDirectors responded that they were committed to holding him to the
itransaction.[206] On July 12, 2022, Twitter formally sued Musk in the
iChancery
iCourt of Delaware for breaching a legally binding agreement to purchase
iTwitter.[207] In October 2022, Musk reversed again, offering to purchase
iTwitter at $54.20 per share.[208] The acquisition was officially completed on
iOctober 27.[209]
i
iImmediately after the acquisition, Musk fired top Twitter executives like CEO
iParag Agrawal,[209][210] whom he replaced.[211] He instituted a $7.99 monthly
isubscription for a "blue check",[212][213][214] and laid off a significant
iportion of the company's staff.[215][216] Musk lessened content
imoderation,[217] and in December, Musk released internal documents relating
ito
iTwitter's moderation of Hunter Biden's laptop in the leadup to the 2020
ipresidential election.[218] The Southern Poverty Law Center noted that
iTwitter
ihas verified numerous extremists.[219] A study of millions of tweets
ifollowing
ithe acquisition indicated that hate speech on the platform has become "more
ivisible" under Musk's leadership.[220]
i
iWithin the first weeks of ownership, Musk made a series of short-lived
idecisions and changes that he quickly reversed, including introducing a paid
iblue checkmark,[221] creating an "official" label[222] and forbidding linking
ito one's profiles on other social media platforms.[223] Under Musk's
imanagement, Twitter experienced several large scale outages.[224][225]
i
iIn April 2022, The Washington Post reported that Musk privately claimed
isupposed censorship on the platform, including the banning of accounts such
ias
iThe Babylon Bee, had prompted him to begin the acquisition. Following the
iacquisition, he made reinstatement of accounts like the Bee an immediate
ipriority.[226] The New York Post revealed that Musk's ex-wife Talulah Riley
ihad encouraged Musk to purchase Twitter, specifically citing the Bee's
iban.[227]
i
iOn December 18, Musk posted a poll to his Twitter account asking users to
idecide whether he should step down as the head of Twitter, with 57.5% out of
ithe more than 17.5 million votes supporting that decision.[228] Musk then
iannounced that he would resign as CEO "as soon as I find someone foolish
ienough to take the job".[229]
i
iOn May 12, 2023, Musk announced that he would be stepping down from the CEO
iposition and instead moving to "exec chair & CTO, overseeing product,
isoftware
i& sysops." He also announced the introduction of a new CEO, former
iNBCUniversal executive Linda Yaccarino.[230][231]
i
iMusk is often described as a micromanager and has called himself a
i"nano-manager".[232] The New York Times has characterized his approach as
iabsolutist.[233] Musk does not make formal business plans;[233] instead, he
isays he prefers to approach engineering problems[non sequitur] with an
i"iterative design methodology" and "tolerance for failures".[234] He has
iforced employees to adopt the company's own jargon and launched ambitious,
irisky, and costly projects against his advisors' recommendations, such as
iremoving front-facing radar from Tesla Autopilot. His insistence on vertical
iintegration causes his companies to move most production in-house. While this
iresulted in saved costs for SpaceX's rocket,[235] vertical integration has
icaused many usability problems for Tesla's software.[232]
i
iMusk's handling of employees—whom he communicates with directly through mass
iemails—has been characterized as "carrot and stick", rewarding those "who
ioffer constructive criticism" while also being known to impulsively threaten,
iswear at, and fire his employees.[236][237][238] Musk said he expects his
iemployees to work for long hours, sometimes for 80 hours per week.[239] He
ihas
ihis new employees sign strict non-disclosure agreements and often fires in
isprees,[240][241] such as during the Model 3 "production hell" in 2018.[241]
iIn 2022, Musk revealed plans to fire 10 percent of Tesla's workforce, due to
ihis concerns about the economy.[242] That same month, he suspended remote
iwork
iat SpaceX and Tesla and threatened to fire employees who do not work 40 hours
iper week in the office.[243]
i
iMusk's leadership has been praised by some, who credit it with the success of
iTesla and his other endeavors,[232] and criticized by others, who see him as
icallous and his managerial decisions as "show[ing] a lack of human
iunderstanding."[238][244] The 2021 book Power Play contains anecdotes of Musk
iberating employees.[245] The Wall Street Journal reported that, after Musk
iinsisted on branding his vehicles as "self-driving", he faced criticism from
ihis engineers for putting customer "lives at risk", with some employees
iresigning in consequence.[246]
i
i===== Other activities =====
i
iMusk is president of the Musk Foundation,[247] whose stated purpose is to
iprovide solar-power energy systems in disaster areas; support research,
idevelopment, and advocacy (for interests including human space exploration,
ipediatrics, renewable energy and "safe artificial intelligence"); and support
iscience and engineering educational efforts.[248] From 2002 to 2018, the
ifoundation gave $25 million directly to non-profit organizations, nearly half
iof which went to Musk's OpenAI,[249] which was a non-profit at the time.[250]
i
iSince 2002, the foundation has made over 350 donations. Around half of them
iwere made to scientific research or education nonprofits. Notable
ibeneficiaries include the Wikimedia Foundation, his alma mater the University
iof Pennsylvania, and his brother Kimbal's Big Green.[251] In 2012, Musk took
ithe Giving Pledge, thereby committing to give the majority of his wealth to
icharitable causes either during his lifetime or in his will.[252] He has
iendowed prizes at the X Prize Foundation, including $100 million to reward
iimproved carbon capture technology.[253]
i
iVox said "the Musk Foundation is almost entertaining in its simplicity and
iyet is strikingly opaque", noting that its website was only 33 words in
iplain-text.[249] The foundation has been criticized for the relatively small
iamount of wealth donated.[254] In 2020, Forbes gave Musk a philanthropy score
iof 1, because he had given away less than 1% of his net worth.[251] In
iNovember 2021, Musk donated $5.7 billion of Tesla's shares to charity,
iaccording to regulatory filings;[255] however, Bloomberg News noted that all
iof it went to his own foundation, bringing Musk Foundation's assets up to
i$9.4
ibillion at the end of 2021. The foundation disbursed $160 million to
inon-profits that year.[256]
i
iIn 2013, Musk announced plans for a version of a vactrain—a vacuum tube
itrain—and assigned a dozen engineers from SpaceX and Tesla to establish the
iconceptual foundations and create initial designs.[257] Later that year, Musk
iunveiled the concept, which he dubbed the hyperloop.[258] The alpha design
ifor
ithe system was published in a whitepaper posted to the Tesla and SpaceX
iblogs.[259] The document scoped out the technology and outlined a notional
iroute where such a transport system could be built between the Greater Los
iAngeles Area and the San Francisco Bay Area, at an estimated cost of $6
ibillion.[260] The proposal, if technologically feasible at the costs cited,
iwould make Hyperloop travel cheaper than any other mode of transport for such
ilong distances.[261]
i
iIn 2015, Musk announced a design competition for students and others to build
iHyperloop pods, to operate on a SpaceX-sponsored mile-long track, for a
i2015–2017 Hyperloop pod competition. The track was used in January 2017, and
iMusk also announced that the company started a tunnel project, with Hawthorne
iMunicipal Airport as its destination.[262] In July 2017, Musk claimed that he
ihad received "verbal government approval" to build a hyperloop from New York
iCity to Washington, D.C., with stops in both Philadelphia and Baltimore.[263]
iMention of the projected DC-to-Baltimore leg was removed from the Boring
iCompany website in 2021.[264] The tunnel project to Hawthorne was
idiscontinued
iin 2022 and is cited to be converted into parking spots for SpaceX
iworkers.[265]
i
iBiographer Ashlee Vance has noted that Musk hoped Hyperloop would "make the
ipublic and legislators rethink the high-speed train" proposal current in
iCalifornia at the time and consider more "creative" ideas.[266]
i
iIn 2015, Musk co-founded OpenAI, a not-for-profit artificial intelligence
i(AI) research company aiming to develop artificial general intelligence
iintended to be safe and beneficial to humanity.[267] A particular focus of
ithe
icompany is to democratize artificial superintelligence systems, against
igovernments and corporations.[22] Musk pledged $1 billion of funding to
iOpenAI.[268] In 2023, Musk tweeted that he had ended up giving a total of
i$100
imillion to OpenAI. TechCrunch later reported that, according to its own
iinvestigation of public records, "only $15 million" of OpenAI's funding could
ibe definitively traced to Musk. Musk subsequently stated that he had donated
iabout $50 million.[269]
i
iIn 2018, Musk left the OpenAI board to avoid possible future conflicts with
ihis role as CEO of Tesla as the latter company increasingly became involved
iin
iAI through Tesla Autopilot.[270] Since then, OpenAI has made significant
iadvances in machine learning, producing neural networks such as GPT-3
i(producing human-like text),[271] and DALL-E (generating digital images from
inatural language descriptions).[272]
i
iIn July 2018, Musk arranged for his employees to build a mini-submarine to
iassist the rescue of children trapped in a flooded cavern in Thailand.[273]
iRichard Stanton, leader of the international rescue diving team, urged Musk
ito
ifacilitate the construction of the vehicle as a back-up, in case flooding
iworsened.[274] Engineers at SpaceX and the Boring Company built the
imini-submarine from a Falcon 9 liquid oxygen transfer tube in eight hours and
ipersonally delivered it to Thailand.[275][276] By this time, however, eight
iof
ithe 12 children, had already been rescued, the rescuers employing full face
imasks, oxygen, and anesthesia; consequently, Thai authorities declined to use
ithe submarine.[273] In March 2019, Musk was later one of the 187 people who
ireceived various honors conferred by the King of Thailand for involvement in
ithe rescue effort.[277]
i
iSoon after the rescue, Vernon Unsworth, a British recreational caver who had
ibeen exploring the cave for the previous six years and played a key advisory
irole in the operation, criticized the submarine on CNN as amounting to
inothing
imore than a public relations effort with no chance of success, maintaining
ithat Musk "had no conception of what the cave passage was like" and "can
istick
ihis submarine where it hurts". Musk asserted on Twitter that the device would
ihave worked and referred to Unsworth as a "pedo guy".[278] He deleted the
itweets,[278] and apologized,[279] and he deleted his responses to critical
itweets from Cher Scarlett, a software engineer, which had caused his
ifollowers
ito harass her.[280] In an email to BuzzFeed News, Musk later called Unsworth
ia
i"child rapist" and said that he had married a child.[281][282]
i
iIn September, Unsworth filed a defamation suit in the District Court for the
iCentral District of California.[283][284] In his defense, Musk argued that
i"'pedo guy' was a common insult used in South Africa when I was growing up
i...
isynonymous with 'creepy old man' and is used to insult a person's appearance
iand demeanor".[28] The defamation case began in December 2019, with Unsworth
iseeking $190 million in damages.[285] During the trial Musk apologized to
iUnsworth again for the tweet. On December 6, the jury found in favor of Musk
iand ruled he was not liable.[286][287]
i
iIn 2018, Musk appeared on The Joe Rogan Experience podcast and discussed
ivarious topics for over two hours. During the interview, Musk sampled a puff
ifrom a cigar consisting, the host claimed, of tobacco laced with cannabis.
iTesla stock dropped after the incident, which coincided with the confirmation
iof the departure of Tesla's vice president of worldwide finance earlier that
iday.[288] Fortune wondered if the cannabis use could have ramifications for
iSpaceX contracts with the United States Air Force, though an Air Force
ispokesperson told The Verge that there was no investigation and that the Air
iForce was still determining the facts.[289] In 2022, Musk claimed that he and
iother Space-X employees were subjected to random drug tests for about a year
ifollowing the incident.[290] In a 60 Minutes interview, Musk said of the
iincident: "I do not smoke pot. As anybody who watched that podcast could
itell,
iI have no idea how to smoke pot."[291]
i
iIn 2019, Musk, through Emo G Records, released a rap track, "RIP Harambe", on
iSoundCloud. The track, which refers to the killing of Harambe the gorilla and
ithe subsequent Internet sensationalism surrounding the event, was performed
iby
iYung Jake, written by Yung Jake and Caroline Polachek, and produced by
iBloodPop.[292][293] The following year, Musk released an EDM track, "Don't
iDoubt Ur Vibe", featuring his own lyrics and vocals.[294] While Guardian
icritic Alexi Petridis described it as "indistinguishable... from umpteen
icompetent but unthrilling bits of bedroom electronica posted elsewhere on
iSoundcloud",[295] TechCrunch said it was "not a bad representation of the
igenre".[294]
i
iIn 2003, Musk said his favorite plane he owned was an L-39 Albatros.[296] He
iuses a private jet owned by Falcon Landing LLC, a SpaceX-linked company, and
iacquired a second jet in August 2020.[297][298] His heavy use of the jet—it
iflew over 150,000 miles in 2018—and the consequent fossil fuel usage has
ireceived criticism.[297][299]
i
iHis flight usage is tracked on social media through ElonJet. The Twitter
iversion of the account was blocked in December 2022, after Musk claimed that
ihis son X AE A-XII had been harassed by a stalker after the account posted
ithe
iairport at which his jet had landed.[300][301][302] This led to Musk banning
ithe ElonJet account on Twitter, as well as the accounts of journalists that
iposted stories regarding the incident, including Donie O'Sullivan, Keith
iOlbermann, and journalists from The New York Times, The Washington Post, CNN,
iand The Intercept.[303] Musk equated the reporting to doxxing.[304] The
ipolice
ido not believe there is a link between the account and alleged stalker.[305]
iMusk later took a Twitter poll on whether the journalists' accounts should be
ireinstated, which resulted in reinstating the accounts.[306][303]
i
i===== Wealth =====
i
iMusk made $175.8 million when PayPal was sold to eBay in 2002.[307] He was
ifirst listed on the Forbes Billionaires List in 2012, with a net worth of $2
ibillion.[308]
i
iAt the start of 2020, Musk had a net worth of $27 billion.[309] By the end of
ithe year his net worth had increased by $150 billion, mostly driven by his
iownership of around 20% of Tesla stock.[310] During this period, Musk's net
iworth was often volatile. For example, it dropped $16.3 billion in September,
ithe largest single-day plunge in Bloomberg Billionaires Index's history.[311]
iIn November of that year, Musk passed Facebook co-founder Mark Zuckerberg to
ibecome the third-richest person in the world; a week later he passed
iMicrosoft
ico-founder Bill Gates to become the second-richest.[312]
i
iIn January 2021, Musk, with a net worth of $185 billion, surpassed Amazon
ifounder Jeff Bezos to become the richest person in the world.[313] Bezos
ireclaimed the top spot the following month.[314] On September 27, 2021, after
iTesla stock surged, Forbes announced that Musk had a net worth of over $200
ibillion, and was the richest person in the world.[315] In November 2021, Musk
ibecame the first person to have a net worth of more than $300 billion.[316]
i
iOn December 30, 2022, it was reported that Musk had lost $200 billion from
ihis net worth due to declining stock values in Tesla, becoming the first
iperson in history to lose such a large sum of money.[317][318] In January
i2023, Musk was recognized by Guinness World Records for experiencing the
i"largest loss of personal fortune in history" with regards to his financial
ilosses since November 2021, which Guinness quoted a Forbes estimate of $182
ibillion.[319]
i
iAround 75% of Musk's wealth derived from Tesla stock in November 2020,[312] a
iproportion that fell to about 37% as of December 2022,[f] after selling
inearly
i$40 billion in company shares since late 2021.[320] Musk does not receive a
isalary from Tesla; he agreed with the board in 2018 to a compensation plan
ithat ties his personal earnings to Tesla's valuation and revenue.[310] The
ideal stipulated that Musk only receives the compensation if Tesla reaches
icertain market values.[321] It was the largest such deal ever done between a
iCEO and a company board.[322] In the first award, given in May 2020, he was
ieligible to purchase 1.69 million Tesla shares (about 1% of the company) at
ibelow-market prices, which was worth about $800 million.[322][321]
i
iMusk paid $455 million in taxes on $1.52 billion of income between 2014 and
i2018.[323] According to ProPublica, Musk paid no federal income taxes in
i2018.[324] He claimed his 2021 tax bill was estimated at $12 billion based on
ihis sale of $14 billion worth of Tesla stock.[323]
i
iMusk has repeatedly described himself as "cash poor",[325][326] and has
i"professed to have little interest in the material trappings of wealth".[325]
iIn May 2020, he pledged to sell almost all physical possessions.[326] Musk
ihas
idefended his wealth by saying he is accumulating resources for humanity's
ioutward expansion to space.[327]
i
i===== Personal views and Twitter usage =====
i
iSince joining Twitter in 2009,[328] Musk has been an active user and has over
i100 million followers as of June 2022[update].[329] He posts memes, promotes
ibusiness interests, and comments on contemporary political and cultural
iissues.[330] Musk's statements have provoked controversy, such as for mocking
ipreferred gender pronouns,[331][332] and comparing Canadian prime minister
iJustin Trudeau to Adolf Hitler.[333] The New York Times describes his
icontributions to international relations as "chaotic", and critics of Musk
iargue that there is a lack of separation between his opinions and his
ibusiness
iinterests.[334] As CEO of Twitter, Musk emerged as a source of
imisinformation,
ifor example by suggesting online details about mass murderer Mauricio
iGarcia's
iapparent interest in Nazism could have been planted as part of a psyop.[335]
iAllegations of him being transphobic appeared as well in response to actions
itaken by Twitter under his guidance.[336][337] The Israel government and
iseveral media outlets accused Musk of antisemitism due to him spreading
iGeorge
iSoros conspiracy theories,[338][339][340] although some Israeli officials
idefended Musk.[341]
i
iMusk has been described as believing in longtermism, emphasizing the needs of
ifuture populations.[342] Accordingly, Musk has stated that artificial
iintelligence poses the greatest existential threat to humanity.[343][344] He
ihas warned of a "Terminator-like" AI apocalypse and suggested that the
igovernment should regulate its safe development.[345][346] In 2015, Musk was
ia
icosignatory, along with Stephen Hawking and hundreds of others, of the Open
iLetter on Artificial Intelligence, which called for the ban of autonomous
iweapons.[347] Musk's AI stances have been called alarmist and sensationalist
iby critics such as computer scientist Yann LeCun and Meta CEO Mark
iZuckerberg,[348][349] and led the think tank Information Technology and
iInnovation Foundation to award Musk its Annual Luddite Award in 2016.[350]
i
iMusk has described climate change as the greatest threat to humanity after
iAI,[351] and has advocated for a carbon tax.[352] Musk was a critic of
iPresident Donald Trump's stance on climate change,[353][354] and resigned
ifrom
itwo presidential business advisory councils following Trump's 2017 decision
ito
iwithdraw the United States from the Paris Agreement.[355]
i
iMusk has long promoted the colonization of Mars and argues that humanity
ishould become a "multiplanetary species".[356] He has suggested the use of
inuclear weapons to terraform Mars.[357][358] He envisioned establishing a
idirect democracy on Mars, with a system in which more votes would be required
ito create laws than remove them.[359] Musk has also voiced concerns about
ihuman population decline,[360][361] saying that "Mars has zero human
ipopulation. We need a lot of people to become a multiplanet
icivilization."[362] Speaking at The Wall Street Journal's CEO Council session
iin 2021, Musk stated that a declining birth rate, and consequent population
idecline, is one of the biggest risks to human civilization.[363]
i
iWhile often described as libertarian, Musk has called himself "politically
imoderate" and was a registered independent voter when he lived in California.
iThe New York Times wrote that Musk "expresses views that don't fit neatly
iinto
i[the American] binary, left-right political framework".[364] Historically,
iMusk has donated to both Democrats and Republicans,[365] many of whom are in
istates in which he has a vested interest.[364] Beginning in the late 2010s,
iMusk's political contributions have shifted to almost entirely supporting
iRepublicans.[366]
i
iMusk voted for Hillary Clinton in the 2016 U.S. presidential election.[367]
iIn the 2020 Democratic Party presidential primaries, Musk endorsed candidate
iAndrew Yang and expressed support for his proposed universal basic
iincome.[368] He also endorsed Kanye West's 2020 presidential campaign.[369]
iHe
isaid he voted for Joe Biden in the 2020 U.S. presidential election.[367] In
i2022, Musk said that he could "no longer support" the Democrats because they
iare the "party of division & hate",[370][371] and wrote a tweet encouraging
i"independent-minded voters" to vote Republican in the 2022 U.S. elections,
iwhich was an outlier among social media executives who typically avoid
ipartisan political advocacy.[372][373] He openly supported Republican Ron
iDeSantis for the 2024 U.S. presidential election by hosting DeSantis's
iannouncement on a Twitter Spaces event.[374][375][376]
i
iMusk opposes a "billionaire's tax",[377] and has argued on Twitter with more
ileft-leaning Democratic politicians such as Bernie Sanders,[378][379]
iAlexandria Ocasio-Cortez,[380] and Elizabeth Warren.[381] He has raised
iquestions about the Black Lives Matter protests, partially based on the fact
ithat the phrase "Hands up, don't shoot" was made up.[382][383] Musk also
ipromoted a baseless theory relating to the attack of Speaker Nancy Pelosi's
ihusband, but Musk deleted his tweet.[384]
i
iMusk has praised China and has been described as having a close relationship
iwith the Chinese government, allowing access to its markets for Tesla.[385]
iAfter Gigafactory Shanghai produced its first batch of vehicles, Musk thanked
ithe Chinese government and Chinese people while criticizing the United States
iand its people.[386]: 207–208  In 2022, Musk wrote an article for China
iCyberspace, the official publication of Cyberspace Administration of China,
iwhich enforces Internet censorship in China. His writing the article was
idescribed as conflicting with his advocacy for free speech.[387][388] Musk
ilater advocated for Taiwan to become a "special administrative zone" of China
iwhich drew cross-party criticism from Taiwanese lawmakers.[389][390][391] In
iOctober 2022, Musk posted a Twitter poll and "peace plan" to resolve the
iRussian invasion of Ukraine.[392][393] It was reported that Musk allegedly
ispoke with Russian President Vladimir Putin prior to the proposal, which Musk
idenied.[394][395][396][397]
i
iMusk was criticized for his public comments and conduct related to the
iCOVID-19 pandemic.[398][399] He spread misinformation about the virus,
iincluding promoting a widely discredited paper on the benefits of chloroquine
iand claiming that COVID-19 death statistics were inflated.[400]
i
iIn March 2020, Musk stated, "The coronavirus panic is dumb."[401][402] In an
iemail to Tesla employees, Musk referred to COVID-19 as a "specific form of
ithe
icommon cold" and predicted that confirmed COVID-19 cases would not exceed
i0.1%
iof the U.S. population.[398] On March 19, 2020, Musk predicted that there
iwould be "probably close to zero new cases in [the U.S.] by end of
iApril".[399] Politico labeled this statement one of "the most audacious,
iconfident, and spectacularly incorrect prognostications [of 2020]".[403] Musk
ialso claimed falsely that children "are essentially immune" to
iCOVID-19.[404][405]
i
iMusk condemned COVID-19 lockdowns and initially refused to close the Tesla
iFremont Factory in March 2020, defying the local shelter-in-place
iorder.[398][406][407] In May 2020, he reopened the Tesla factory, defying the
ilocal stay-at-home order,[408][409] and warned workers that they would be
iunpaid, and their unemployment benefits might be jeopardized, if they did not
ireport to work.[409] In December 2022, Musk called for prosecution of former
iNational Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases director Anthony
iFauci.[410][411]
i
iIn March 2020, Musk promised that Tesla would make ventilators for COVID-19
ipatients if there were a shortage.[412] After figures like New York City
imayor
iBill de Blasio responded to Musk's offer,[413] Musk offered to donate
iventilators which Tesla would build or buy from a third party.[412] However,
iMusk ended up buying and donating BiPAP and CPAP machines, which are
inon-invasive ventilators, rather than the much more expensive and
isought-after
iinvasive mechanical ventilator machines.[414][415]
i
iIn September 2020, Musk stated that he would not get the COVID-19 vaccine,
ibecause he and his children were "not at risk for COVID".[416][417] Two
imonths
ilater, Musk contracted COVID-19 and suggested his COVID-19 rapid antigen test
iresults were dubious, after which the phrase "Space Karen" trended on
iTwitter,
iin reference to Musk.[418][419] However, in December 2021, Musk revealed that
ihe and his eligible children had received the vaccine.[420] In January 2023,
iMusk stated that he experienced intense adverse reactions after his second
iCOVID-19 vaccine booster shot.[421]
i
iMusk said that the U.S. government should not provide subsidies to companies,
ibut impose a carbon tax to discourage poor behavior.[422][423] The free
imarket, in his view, would achieve the best solution, and producing
ienvironmentally unfriendly vehicles should have consequences.[424] Tesla has
ireceived billions of dollars in subsidies.[425] In addition, Tesla made large
isums from government-initiated systems of zero-emissions credits offered in
iCalifornia and at the United States federal level, which facilitated initial
iconsumer adoption of Tesla vehicles, as the tax credits given by governments
ienabled Tesla's battery electric vehicles to be price-competitive, in
icomparison with existing lower-priced internal combustion engine
ivehicles.[426] Notably, Tesla generates some of its revenue from its sales of
icarbon credits granted to the company, by both the European Union Emissions
iTrading System and the Chinese national carbon trading
ischeme.[427][428][429][430]
i
iMusk, a longtime opponent of short-selling, has repeatedly criticized the
ipractice and argued it should be illegal.[431][432] Wired magazine speculated
ithat Musk's opposition to short-selling stems from how short sellers have an
iincentive to find and promote unfavorable information about his
icompanies.[433] In early 2021, he encouraged the GameStop short
isqueeze.[434][435]
i
iIn December 2022, Musk sold $3.6 billion of his stock in Tesla, equal to 22
imillion shares in the company,[436] despite pledging earlier in the year that
ihe would not sell any additional shares.[437]
i
iMusk has promoted cryptocurrencies and supports them over traditional
igovernment-issued fiat currencies.[438] Given the influence of Musk's tweets
iin moving cryptocurrency markets,[439] his statements about cryptocurrencies
ihave been viewed as market manipulation by some, such as economist Nouriel
iRoubini.[440] Musk's social media praising of Bitcoin and Dogecoin was
icredited for increasing their prices. Consequently, Tesla's 2021
iannouncement,
iagainst the backdrop of Musk's social media behavior, that it bought $1.5
ibillion worth of Bitcoin, raised questions.[441] Tesla's announcement that it
iwould accept Bitcoin for payment was criticized by environmentalists and
iinvestors, due to the environmental impact of cryptocurrency mining. A few
imonths later, in response to the criticism, Musk announced on Twitter that
iTesla would no longer accept payments in Bitcoin and would not engage in any
iBitcoin transactions until the environmental issues are solved.[442][443]
i
iDespite the Boring Company's involvement in building mass transit
iinfrastructure, Musk has criticized public transport and promoted
iindividualized transport (private vehicles).[444][445][446] His comments have
ibeen called "elitist" and have sparked widespread criticism from both
itransportation and urban planning experts, who have pointed out that public
itransportation in dense urban areas is more economical, more energy
iefficient,
iand requires much less space than private cars.[445][447][446]
i
i===== Personal life =====
i
iFrom the early 2000s until late 2020, Musk resided in California, where both
iTesla and SpaceX were founded.[448] In 2020, he moved to Texas, saying that
iCalifornia had become "complacent" about its economic success.[448][449]
iWhile
ihosting Saturday Night Live in May 2021, Musk said that he has Asperger
isyndrome.[450]
i
iMusk met his first wife, Canadian Justine Wilson, while attending Queen's
iUniversity in Ontario, Canada; and they married in 2000.[451] In 2002, their
ifirst child died of sudden infant death syndrome at the age of 10 weeks.[452]
iAfter his death, the couple decided to use IVF to continue their family.[453]
iThey had twins in 2004 followed by triplets in 2006.[453] The couple divorced
iin 2008 and shared custody of their children.[454][455] In 2022, one of the
itwins officially changed her name to reflect her gender identity as a
itranswoman, and to use Wilson as her last name because she no longer wished
ito
ibe associated with Musk.[456] Musk blamed the estrangement of his daughter on
iwhat the Financial Times characterized as "the supposed takeover of elite
ischools and universities by neo-Marxists."[457]
i
iIn 2008, Musk began dating English actress Talulah Riley.[458] They married
itwo years later at Dornoch Cathedral in Scotland.[459][460] In 2012, the
icouple divorced, before remarrying the following year.[461] After briefly
ifiling for divorce in 2014,[461] Musk finalized a second divorce from Riley
iin
i2016.[462] Musk then dated Amber Heard for several months in 2017;[463] he
ihad
ireportedly been pursuing her since 2012.[464] Johnny Depp later accused Musk
iof having an affair with Heard while she was still married to Depp.[465][466]
iMusk and Heard both denied the affair.[465]
i
iIn 2018, Musk and Canadian musician Grimes revealed that they were
idating.[467] Grimes gave birth to their son in May 2020.[468][469] According
ito Musk and Grimes, his name was "X Æ A-12" (/ɛks æʃ eɪ ˈtwɛlv/); however,
ithe
iname would have violated California regulations as it contained characters
ithat are not in the modern English alphabet,[470][471] and was then changed
ito
i"X Æ A-Xii". This drew more confusion, as Æ is not a letter in the modern
iEnglish alphabet.[472] The child was eventually named X AE A-XII Musk, with
i"X" as a first name, "AE A-XII" as a middle name, and "Musk" as surname.[473]
iIn December 2021, Grimes and Musk had a second child, a daughter named Exa
iDark Sideræl Musk (nicknamed "Y"), born via surrogacy.[1] Despite the
ipregnancy, Musk confirmed reports that the couple were "semi-separated" in
iSeptember 2021; in an interview with Time in December 2021, he said he was
isingle.[474][475] In March 2022, Grimes said of her relationship with Musk:
i"I
iwould probably refer to him as my boyfriend, but we're very fluid."[1] Later
ithat month, Grimes tweeted that she and Musk had broken up again but remained
ion good terms.[476]
i
iIn July 2022, Insider published court documents revealing that Musk had had
itwins with Shivon Zilis, director of operations and special projects at
iNeuralink, in November 2021.[3] They were born weeks before Musk and Grimes
ihad their second child via surrogate in December. The news "raise[d]
iquestions
iabout workplace ethics", given that Zilis directly reported to Musk.[477]
iAlso
iin July 2022, The Wall Street Journal reported that Musk allegedly had an
iaffair with Nicole Shanahan, the wife of Google co-founder Sergey Brin, in
i2021, leading to their divorce the following year.[478] Musk denied the
ireport.[479]
i
iAs of September 2022[update], Musk is a defendant in 24 lawsuits.[480]
i
iIn April 2023, the government of the US Virgin Islands sought to subpoena
iMusk for documents in a lawsuit alleging that JPMorgan Chase profited from
iJeffrey Epstein’s sex trafficking operation.[481] In May, a judge granted the
iUS Virgin Islands' request to serve Musk electronically through Tesla after
ithe U.S. territory had difficulty locating him.[481] The efforts to subpoena
iMusk for documents do not implicate him in any wrongdoing and do not seek to
ihave Musk testify under oath.[481]
i
iIn May 2022, Business Insider cited an anonymous friend of an unnamed SpaceX
icontract flight attendant, alleging that Musk engaged in sexual misconduct in
i2016. The source stated that in November 2018, Musk, SpaceX, and the former
iflight attendant entered into a severance agreement granting the attendant a
i$250,000 payment in exchange for a promise not to sue over the claims.[482]
iMusk responded, "If I were inclined to engage in sexual harassment, this is
iunlikely to be the first time in my entire 30-year career that it comes to
ilight". He accused the article from Business Insider of being a "politically
imotivated hit piece".[483][484] After the release of the Business Insider
iarticle, Tesla's stock fell by more than 6%,[485] decreasing Musk's net worth
iby $10 billion.[486] Barron's wrote "...some investors considered key-man
irisk
i– the danger that a company could be badly hurt by the loss of one
iindividual."[487]
i
i===== Public perception =====
i
iThough Musk's ventures were influential within their own industries in the
i2000s, Musk only became a public figure in the early 2010s. He is often
idescribed as an eccentric who makes spontaneous and controversial statements,
icontrary to other billionaires who prefer reclusiveness to protect their
ibusinesses.[488][489] Celebrated by fans and hated by critics, Musk was
idescribed by Vance as having become very polarizing because of his "part
iphilosopher, part troll" role on Twitter.[490]
i
iWith Steve Jobs and Donald Trump, Musk served as inspiration for the
icharacterization of Tony Stark in the Marvel film Iron Man (2008).[491] Musk
ihad a cameo appearance in the 2010 sequel, Iron Man 2.[492] Musk has made
icameos and appearances in other films such as Machete Kills (2013),[493] Why
iHim? (2016),[494] and Men in Black: International (2019).[495] Television
iseries in which he has appeared include The Simpsons ("The Musk Who Fell to
iEarth", 2015),[496] The Big Bang Theory ("The Platonic Permutation",
i2015),[497] South Park ("Members Only", 2016),[498][499] Young Sheldon ("A
iPatch, a Modem, and a Zantac®", 2017),[500] Rick and Morty ("One Crew over
ithe
iCrewcoo's Morty", 2019),[501][502] and Saturday Night Live (2021).[503] He
icontributed interviews to the documentaries Racing Extinction (2015) and the
iWerner Herzog-directed Lo and Behold (2016).[504][505]
i
iMusk was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society (FRS) in 2018.[506] In 2015,
ihe received an honorary doctorate in engineering and technology from Yale
iUniversity[507] and IEEE Honorary Membership.[508] Awards for his
icontributions to the development of the Falcon rockets include the American
iInstitute of Aeronautics and Astronautics George Low Transportation Award in
i2008,[509] the Fédération Aéronautique Internationale Gold Space Medal in
i2010,[510] and the Royal Aeronautical Society Gold Medal in 2012.[511] He was
ilisted among Time magazine's 100 Most Influential People in 2010,[512]
i2013,[513] 2018,[514] and 2021.[515] Musk was selected as Time's "Person of
ithe Year" for 2021. Time editor-in-chief Edward Felsenthal wrote that "Person
iof the Year is a marker of influence, and few individuals have had more
iinfluence than Musk on life on Earth, and potentially life off Earth
itoo".[516][517] In 2022, Musk was elected as a member of the National Academy
iof Engineering.[518]
i
i===== See also =====
i
i===== Notes =====
i
i===== References =====
i
i
i
i  ------------- SOURCE ----------------
i
iURL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Elon_Musk
i
iLICENSE: Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike
i
i=========================================
i
i
i$
Bt:Elon Musk - Wikipedia	/x/w/g/https_58__47__47_en_46_wikipedia_46_org_47_wiki_47_Elon_95_Musk	texopher.com	70
