i
1[?] Read Details	/x/w/gd/https_58__47__47_en_46_wikipedia_46_org_47_wiki_47_Johnny_95_Depp	texopher.com	70
i
i===== Contents =====
i
iJohn Christopher Depp II (born June 9, 1963) is an American actor and
imusician. He is the recipient of multiple accolades, including a Golden Globe
iAward and a Screen Actors Guild Award, and has been nominated for three
iAcademy Awards and two BAFTA awards.
i
iDepp made his feature film debut in the horror film A Nightmare on Elm Street
i(1984) and appeared in Platoon (1986), before rising to prominence as a teen
iidol on the television series 21 Jump Street (1987–1990). In the 1990s, Depp
iacted mostly in independent films with auteur directors, often playing
ieccentric characters. These included Cry-Baby (1990), What's Eating Gilbert
iGrape (1993), Benny and Joon (1993), Dead Man (1995), Donnie Brasco (1997),
iand Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas (1998). Depp also began his longtime
icollaboration with the director Tim Burton, portraying the leads in the films
iEdward Scissorhands (1990), Ed Wood (1994), and Sleepy Hollow (1999).
i
iIn the 2000s, Depp became one of the most commercially successful film stars
iby playing Captain Jack Sparrow in the Walt Disney swashbuckler film series
iPirates of the Caribbean (2003–2017). He also received acclaim for Chocolat
i(2000), Finding Neverland (2004) and Public Enemies (2009), and continued his
icommercially successful collaboration with Burton with the films Charlie and
ithe Chocolate Factory (2005), Corpse Bride (2005), Sweeney Todd: The Demon
iBarber of Fleet Street (2007), and Alice in Wonderland (2010).
i
iIn 2012, Depp was one of the world's biggest film stars,[1][2] and was listed
iby the Guinness World Records as the world's highest-paid actor, with
iearnings
iof US$75 million in a year.[3] During the 2010s, Depp began producing films
ithrough his company Infinitum Nihil. He also received acclaim for Black Mass
i(2015) and formed the rock supergroup Hollywood Vampires with Alice Cooper
iand
iJoe Perry, before starring as Gellert Grindelwald in the Wizarding World
ifilms
iFantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them (2016) and Fantastic Beasts: The
iCrimes of Grindelwald (2018).
i
iBetween 1998 and 2012, Depp was in a relationship with the French singer
iVanessa Paradis, with whom he had two children, including the actress
iLily-Rose Depp. From 2015 to 2017, Depp was married to the actress Amber
iHeard. Their divorce drew media attention, as both alleged abuse against each
iother and both engaged in highly publicized defamation cases.
i
i===== Early life =====
i
iJohn Christopher Depp II was born on June 9, 1963, in Owensboro,
iKentucky,[4][5][6] the youngest of four children of waitress Betty Sue Depp
i(née Wells; later Palmer)[7] and civil engineer John Christopher Depp.[8][9]
iDepp's family moved frequently during his childhood, eventually settling in
iMiramar, Florida, in 1970.[10] His parents divorced in 1978 when he was
i15,[10][11] and his mother later married Robert Palmer, whom Depp has called
i"an inspiration".[12][13]
i
iDepp's mother gave him a guitar when he was 12, and he began playing in
ivarious bands.[10] He dropped out of Miramar High School at 16 in 1979 to
ibecome a rock musician. He attempted to go back to school two weeks later,
ibut
ithe principal told him to follow his dream of being a musician.[10] In 1980,
iDepp began playing in a band called The Kids. After modest local success in
iFlorida, the band moved to Los Angeles in pursuit of a record deal, changing
iits name to Six Gun Method. In addition to the band, Depp worked a variety of
iodd jobs, such as in telemarketing. In December 1983, Depp married makeup
iartist Lori Anne Allison,[5] the sister of his band's bassist and singer. The
iKids split up before signing a record deal in 1984, and Depp began
icollaborating with the band Rock City Angels.[14] He co-wrote their song
i"Mary", which appeared on their debut Geffen Records album Young Man's
iBlues.[15] Depp and Allison divorced in 1985.[5]
i
iDepp is of primarily English descent, with some French, German, and Irish
iancestry.[16] His surname comes from a French Huguenot immigrant, Pierre
iDieppe, who settled in Virginia around 1700. He is also a descendant of
iElizabeth Key Grinstead, one of the first women of African American ancestry
iin the North American colonies to sue for her freedom and win.[17] In
iinterviews in 2002 and 2011, Depp claimed to have Native American ancestry,
isaying: "I guess I have some Native American somewhere down the line. My
igreat-grandmother was quite a bit of Native American. She grew up Cherokee or
imaybe Creek Indian. Makes sense in terms of coming from Kentucky, which is
irife with Cherokee and Creek Indian".[18] Depp's claims came under scrutiny
iwhen Indian Country Today wrote that Depp had never inquired about his
iheritage or been recognized as a member of the Cherokee Nation.[19] This led
ito criticism of Depp by the Native American community, as Depp has no
idocumented Native ancestry,[19] and Native community leaders consider him "a
inon-Indian"[19][20] and a pretendian.[21][22][23] Depp's choice to portray
iTonto, a Native American character, in The Lone Ranger was
icriticized,[19][20]
ialong with his choice to name his rock band "Tonto's Giant
iNuts".[24][25][26][27] During the promotion for The Lone Ranger, Depp was
iformally adopted as an honorary son by LaDonna Harris, a member of the
iComanche Nation, making him an honorary member of her family but not a member
iof any tribe.[28][29] Depp's Comanche name given at the adoption was "Mah Woo
iMay", which means shape shifter.[30] Critical response to his claims from the
iNative community increased after this, including satirical portrayals of Depp
iby Native comedians.[25][26][27] An ad featuring Depp and Native American
iimagery, by Dior for the fragrance "Sauvage", was pulled in 2019 after being
iaccused of cultural appropriation and racism.[31][32][33][34][28]
i
i===== Career =====
i
iDepp moved to Los Angeles with his band when he was 20. After the band split
iup, Depp's then-wife Lori Ann Allison introduced him to actor Nicolas
iCage.[10] After they became drinking buddies, Cage advised him to pursue
iacting.[35] Depp had been interested in acting since reading a biography of
iJames Dean and watching Rebel Without a Cause.[36] Cage helped Depp get an
iaudition with Wes Craven for A Nightmare on Elm Street; Depp, who had no
iacting experience, said he "ended up acting by accident".[37][38] Thanks in
ipart to his catching the eye of Craven's daughter,[37] Depp landed the role
iof
ithe main character's boyfriend, one of Freddy Krueger's victims.[10]
i
iThough Depp said he "didn't have any desire to be an actor", he continued to
ibe cast in films,[38] making enough to cover some bills that his musical
icareer left unpaid.[37] After a starring role in the 1985 comedy Private
iResort, Depp was cast in the lead role of the 1986 skating drama Thrashin' by
ithe film's director, but its producer overrode the decision.[39][40] Instead,
iDepp appeared in a minor supporting role as a Vietnamese-speaking private in
iOliver Stone's 1986 Vietnam War drama Platoon. He became a teen idol during
ithe late 1980s, when he starred as an undercover police officer in a high
ischool operation in the Fox television series 21 Jump Street, which premiered
iin 1987.[10] He accepted this role to work with actor Frederic Forrest, who
iinspired him. Despite his success, Depp felt that the series "forced [him]
iinto the role of product".[41]
i
iDisillusioned by his experiences as a teen idol in 21 Jump Street, Depp began
itaking roles he found more interesting, rather than those he thought would
isucceed at the box office.[41][42] His first film release in 1990 was John
iWaters's Cry-Baby, a musical comedy set in the 1950s. Although not a
ibox-office success upon its release,[43] over the years it has gained cult
iclassic status.[44] Also in 1990, Depp played the title character in Tim
iBurton's romantic fantasy film Edward Scissorhands opposite Dianne Wiest and
iWinona Ryder. The film was a commercial and critical success with a domestic
igross of $53 million.[45] In preparation for the role, Depp watched many
iCharlie Chaplin films to study how to create sympathy without dialogue.[46]
iPeter Travers of Rolling Stone praised Depp's performance, writing that he
i"artfully expresses the fierce longing in gentle Edward; it's a terrific
iperformance",[47] while Rita Kempley of The Washington Post wrote that he
i"brings the eloquence of the silent era to this part of few words, saying it
iall through bright black eyes and the tremulous care with which he holds his
ihorror-movie hands".[48] Depp earned his first Golden Globe nomination for
ithe
ifilm. Owing to this role, a species of extinct arthropod with prominent claws
iwas named after Depp as Kootenichela deppi (chela is Latin for claws or
iscissors).
i
iDepp had no film releases in the next two years, except a brief cameo in
iFreddy's Dead: The Final Nightmare (1991), the sixth installment in the A
iNightmare on Elm Street franchise. He appeared in three films in 1993. In the
iromantic comedy Benny and Joon, he played an eccentric and illiterate silent
ifilm fan who befriends a mentally ill woman and her brother; it became a
isleeper hit. Janet Maslin of The New York Times wrote that Depp "may look
inothing like Buster Keaton, but there are times when he genuinely seems to
ibecome the Great Stone Face, bringing Keaton's mannerisms sweetly and
imagically to life".[49] Depp received a second Golden Globe nomination for
ithe
iperformance. His second film of 1993 was Lasse Hallström's What's Eating
iGilbert Grape, a drama about a dysfunctional family co-starring Leonardo
iDiCaprio and Juliette Lewis. It did not perform well commercially, but
ireceived positive notices from critics.[50] Although most of the reviews
ifocused on DiCaprio, who was nominated for an Academy Award for his
iperformance, Todd McCarthy of Variety wrote that "Depp manages to command
icenter screen with a greatly affable, appealing characterization".[51] Depp's
ilast 1993 release was Emir Kusturica's surrealist comedy-drama Arizona Dream,
iwhich opened to positive reviews and won the Silver Bear at the Berlin Film
iFestival.
i
iIn 1994, Depp reunited with Burton, playing the title role in Ed Wood, a
ibiographical film about one of history's most inept film directors. Depp
ilater
isaid that he was depressed about films and filmmaking at the time, but that
i"within 10 minutes of hearing about the project, I was committed".[52] He
ifound that the role gave him a "chance to stretch out and have some fun" and
ithat working with Martin Landau, who played Bela Lugosi, "rejuvenated my love
ifor acting".[52] Although it did not earn back its production costs, Ed Wood
ireceived a positive reception from critics, with Maslin writing that Depp had
i"proved himself as an established, certified great actor" and "captured all
ithe can-do optimism that kept Ed Wood going, thanks to an extremely funny
iability to look at the silver lining of any cloud".[53] Depp was nominated
ifor
ia third time for a Best Musical or Comedy Actor Golden Globe for his
iperformance.
i
iThe next year, Depp starred in three films. He played opposite Marlon Brando
iin the box-office hit Don Juan DeMarco, as a man who believes he is Don Juan,
ithe world's greatest lover. He starred in Jim Jarmusch's Dead Man, a Western
ishot entirely in black-and-white; it was not a commercial success and had
imixed critical reviews. And in the financial and critical failure Nick of
iTime, Depp played an accountant who is told to kill a politician to save his
ikidnapped daughter.
i
iIn 1997, Depp and Al Pacino starred in the crime drama Donnie Brasco,
idirected by Mike Newell. Depp played Joseph D. Pistone, an undercover FBI
iagent who assumes the name Donnie Brasco to infiltrate the Mafia in New York
iCity. To prepare, Depp spent time with Pistone, on whose memoirs the film was
ibased. Donnie Brasco was a commercial and critical success, and is considered
ione of Depp's finest performances.[54][55] Also in 1997, Depp debuted as a
idirector and screenwriter with The Brave. He starred in it as a poor Native
iAmerican man who accepts a proposal from a wealthy man, played by Marlon
iBrando, to appear in a snuff film in exchange for money for his family. It
ipremiered at the 1997 Cannes Film Festival to generally negative reviews.[56]
iVariety called it "a turgid and unbelievable neo-western",[57] and Time Out
iwrote that "besides the implausibilities, the direction has two fatal flaws:
iit's both tediously slow and hugely narcissistic as the camera focuses
irepeatedly on Depp's bandana'd head and rippling torso".[58] Due to the
ireviews, Depp did not release The Brave in the U.S.[59][60]
i
iDepp was a fan and friend of writer Hunter S. Thompson, and played his alter
iego Raoul Duke in Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas (1998), Terry Gilliam's film
iadaptation of Thompson's pseudo-biographical novel of the same name.[a] It
iwas
ia box-office failure[63] and polarized critics.[64] Later that year, Depp
imade
ia brief cameo in Mika Kaurismäki's L.A. Without a Map (1998).
i
iDepp appeared in three films in 1999. The first was the sci-fi thriller The
iAstronaut's Wife, co-starring Charlize Theron, which was not a commercial or
icritical success. The second, Roman Polanski's The Ninth Gate, starred Depp
ias
ia seller of old books who becomes entangled in a mystery. It was moderately
imore successful with audiences but received mixed reviews. The third was
iBurton's adaptation of The Legend of Sleepy Hollow, where Depp played Ichabod
iCrane opposite Christina Ricci and Christopher Walken. For his performance,
iDepp took inspiration from Angela Lansbury, Roddy McDowall and Basil
iRathbone,
isaying he "always thought of Ichabod as a very delicate, fragile person who
iwas maybe a little too in touch with his feminine side, like a frightened
ilittle girl".[65][66] Sleepy Hollow was a commercial and critical success.
i
iDepp's first film release of the new millennium was British-French drama The
iMan Who Cried (2000), directed by Sally Potter and starring him as a Roma
ihorseman opposite Christina Ricci, Cate Blanchett, and John Turturro. It was
inot a critical success. Depp also had a supporting role in Julian Schnabel's
icritically acclaimed Before Night Falls (2000). His final film of 2000 was
iHallström's critically and commercially successful Chocolat, in which he
iplayed a Roma man and the love interest of the main character, Juliette
iBinoche. Depp's next roles were both based on historical persons. In Blow
i(2001), he starred as cocaine smuggler George Jung, who was part of the
iMedellín Cartel in the 1980s. The film underperformed at the box office[67]
iand received mixed reviews.[68][69] In the comic book adaptation From Hell
i(2001), Depp portrayed inspector Frederick Abberline, who investigated the
iJack the Ripper murders in the 1880s London. The film also received mixed
ireviews[70] but was a moderate commercial success.[71]
i
iIn 2003, Depp starred in the Walt Disney Pictures adventure film Pirates of
ithe Caribbean: The Curse of the Black Pearl, which was a major box office
isuccess.[42] He earned widespread acclaim for his comic performance as pirate
iCaptain Jack Sparrow, and received Academy Award, Golden Globe and BAFTA
inominations and won a Screen Actor's Guild Award for Best Actor as well as an
iMTV Movie Award. Depp has said that Sparrow is "definitely a big part of
ime",[72] and that he modeled the character after The Rolling Stones guitarist
iKeith Richards[73] and cartoon skunk Pepé Le Pew.[74] Studio executives had
iat
ifirst been ambivalent about Depp's portrayal,[75] but the character became
ipopular with audiences.[42] In his other film release in 2003, Robert
iRodriguez' action film Once Upon a Time in Mexico, Depp played a corrupt CIA
iagent. A moderate box-office success,[76] it received average to good
ireviews,
iwith Depp's performance in particular receiving praise.[77][78]
i
iDepp next starred as an author with writer's block in the thriller Secret
iWindow (2004), based on a short story by Stephen King. It was a moderate
icommercial success but received mixed reviews.[79][80] Released around the
isame time, the British-Australian independent film The Libertine (2004) saw
iDepp portray the seventeenth-century poet and rake, the Earl of Rochester. It
ihad only limited release, and received mainly negative reviews. Depp's third
ifilm of 2004, Finding Neverland, was more positively received by the critics,
iand earned him his second Academy Award nomination as well as Golden Globe,
iBAFTA, and SAG nominations for his performance as Scottish author J. M.
iBarrie. Depp also made a brief cameo appearance in the French film Happily
iEver After (2004), and founded his own film production company, Infinitum
iNihil, under Warner Bros. Pictures.[81]
i
iDepp continued his box-office success with a starring role as Willy Wonka in
iTim Burton's adaptation of Charlie and the Chocolate Factory (2005). It also
ihad a positive critical reception,[82][83] with Depp being nominated again
ifor
ithe Golden Globe for Best Actor in a Comedy or Musical.[73][84] Chocolate
iFactory was followed by another Burton project, stop-motion animation Corpse
iBride (2005), in which Depp voiced the main character, Victor Van Dort.[85]
iDepp reprised the role of Jack Sparrow in the Pirates sequels Dead Man's
iChest
i(2006) and At World's End (2007), both of which were major box office
isuccesses.[86] He also voiced the character in the video game Pirates of the
iCaribbean: The Legend of Jack Sparrow.[87] According to a survey taken by
iFandango, Depp in the role of Jack Sparrow was the main reason for many
icinema-goers to see a Pirates film.[88]
i
iIn 2007, Depp collaborated with Burton for their sixth film together, this
itime playing murderous barber Sweeney Todd in the musical Sweeney Todd: The
iDemon Barber of Fleet Street (2007). Depp cited Peter Lorre's performance in
iMad Love (1935), in which Lorre played a "creepy but sympathetic" surgeon, as
ihis main influence for the role.[89] Sweeney Todd was the first film in which
iDepp had been required to sing. Instead of hiring a qualified vocal coach, he
iprepared for the role by recording demos with his old bandmate Bruce Witkin.
iThe film was a commercial and critical success. Entertainment Weekly's Chris
iNashawaty stated that "Depp's soaring voice makes you wonder what other
itricks
ihe's been hiding ... Watching Depp's barber wield his razors ... it's hard
inot
ito be reminded of Edward Scissorhands frantically shaping hedges into animal
itopiaries 18 years ago ... and all of the twisted beauty we would've missed
iout on had [Burton and Depp] never met".[90] Depp won the Golden Globe for
iBest Musical or Comedy Actor for the role, and was nominated for the third
itime for an Academy Award.
i
iIn 2009, Depp portrayed real-life gangster John Dillinger in Michael Mann's
i1930s crime film Public Enemies.[91] It was commercially successful[92] and
igained moderately positive reviews.[93][94] Roger Ebert stated in his review
ithat "This Johnny Depp performance is something else. For once an actor
iplaying a gangster does not seem to base his performance on movies he has
iseen. He starts cold. He plays Dillinger as a fact".[95] Depp's second film
iof
i2009, The Imaginarium of Doctor Parnassus, reunited him with director Terry
iGilliam. Depp, Jude Law, and Colin Farrell each played the character
iinitially
iportrayed by their friend Heath Ledger, who had died before the film was
icompleted. All three actors gave their salaries to Ledger's daughter,
iMatilda.[96]
i
iDepp began the 2010s with another collaboration with Tim Burton, Alice in
iWonderland (2010), in which he played the Mad Hatter opposite Helena Bonham
iCarter, Anne Hathaway and Alan Rickman. Despite mixed reviews, it earned
iUS$1.025 billion in the box office, thus becoming the second-highest-grossing
ifilm of 2010[97] and one of the highest-grossing films of all time.[98]
iDepp's
isecond film release of 2010 was the romantic thriller The Tourist, in which
ihe
istarred opposite Angelina Jolie. It was commercially successful, although
ipanned by critics.[99] Regardless, he received Best Actor in a Musical or
iComedy Golden Globe nominations for both films.
i
iDepp's first 2011 film release was the animated film Rango, in which he
ivoiced the title character, a lizard. It was a major critical and commercial
isuccess.[100][101] His second film of the year, the fourth installment in the
iPirates series, On Stranger Tides, was again a box office hit,[86] becoming
ithe third-highest-grossing film of 2011.[102] Later in 2011, Depp released
ithe
ifirst two projects co-produced by his company, Infinitum Nihil. The first was
ia film adaptation of the novel The Rum Diary by Hunter S. Thompson and
istarred
iDepp.[103] It failed to bring back its production costs[104][105] and
ireceived
imixed reviews.[106][107] The company's second undertaking, Martin Scorsese's
iHugo (2011), garnered major critical acclaim and several awards nominations,
ibut similarly did not perform well in the box office. In 2011, Depp also made
ia brief cameo in the Adam Sandler film Jack and Jill.
i
iBy 2012, Depp was one of the world's biggest film stars,[1][2] and was listed
iby the Guinness World Records as the world's highest-paid actor, with
iearnings
iof US$75 million.[3] That year, he and his 21 Jump Street co-stars Peter
iDeLuise and Holly Robinson reprised their roles in cameo appearances in the
iseries' feature film adaptation.[108] Depp also starred in and co-produced
ihis
ieighth film with Tim Burton, Dark Shadows (2012), alongside Helena Bonham
iCarter, Michelle Pfeiffer, and Eva Green.[109] The film was based on a 1960s
iGothic television soap opera of the same name, which had been one of his
ifavorites as a child. The film's poor reception in the United States brought
iDepp's star appeal into question.[110]
i
iAfter Infinitum Nihil's agreement with WB expired in 2011, Depp signed a
imulti-year first-look deal with Walt Disney Studios.[81] The first film made
iin the collaboration was The Lone Ranger (2013), in which Depp starred as
iTonto. Depp's casting as a Native American brought accusations of
iwhitewashing, and the film was not well received by the public or the
icritics,[111] causing Disney to take a US$190 million
iloss.[112][113][114][115] Following a brief cameo in the independent film
iLucky Them (2013), Depp starred as an AI-studying scientist in the sci-fi
ithriller Transcendence (2014), which was yet another commercial
ifailure,[116][117] and earned mainly negative reviews.[112][118][119] His
iother roles in 2014 were a minor supporting part as The Wolf in the film
iadaptation of Into the Woods, and a more substantial appearance as eccentric
iFrench-Canadian ex-detective in Kevin Smith's horror-comedy Tusk, in which he
iwas credited by the character's name, Guy LaPointe.
i
iIn 2015, Depp appeared in two films produced by Infinitum Nihil. The first
iwas comedy-thriller Mortdecai, in which he acted opposite Gwyneth Paltrow.
iThe
ifilm was a critical and commercial failure and brought both stars Golden
iRaspberry nominations.[112][120][121][122] The second film, Black Mass
i(2015),
iin which he played Boston crime boss Whitey Bulger, was better
ireceived.[123][124] Critics from The Hollywood Reporter and Variety called it
ione of Depp's best performances to date,[125][126] and the role earned Depp
ihis third nomination for the Best Actor SAG award.[127] However, the film
ifailed to bring back its production costs.[112] Depp also made a cameo
iappearance in the critically panned London Fields, starring his then-wife
iAmber Heard, which was to be released in 2015, but its general release was
idelayed by litigation until 2018.[128][129] In addition to his work in films
iin 2015, French luxury fashion house Dior signed Depp as the face of their
imen's fragrance, Sauvage,[130] and he was inducted as a Disney Legend.[131]
i
iDepp's first film release in 2016 was Yoga Hosers, a sequel to Tusk (2014),
iin which Depp appeared with his daughter, Lily-Rose Depp. Next, he played
ibusinessman and presidential candidate Donald Trump in a Funny or Die satire
ientitled Donald Trump's The Art of the Deal: The Movie, released during the
irun-up to the US presidential election. He earned praise for the role, with a
iheadline from The A.V. Club declaring, "Who knew Donald Trump was the
icomeback
irole Johnny Depp needed?"[132] It was also announced that Depp had been cast
iin a new franchise role as Dr. Jack Griffin/The Invisible Man in Universal
iStudios's planned shared film universe entitled the Dark Universe, a rebooted
iversion of their classic Universal Monsters franchise.[133] Depp reprised the
irole of the Mad Hatter in Tim Burton's Alice Through the Looking Glass
i(2016),
ithe sequel to Alice in Wonderland. In contrast to the first film's success,
ithe sequel lost Disney approximately US$70 million.[134][112] It also gained
iDepp two Golden Raspberry nominations. Depp had also been secretly cast to
iplay dark wizard Gellert Grindelwald in a cameo appearance in Fantastic
iBeasts
iand Where to Find Them (2016), the first installment of the Fantastic Beasts
ifranchise. His name was not mentioned in the promotional materials and his
icameo was only revealed at the end of the film.[135][136]
i
iIn 2017, Depp appeared alongside other actors and filmmakers in The Black
iGhiandola, a short film made by a terminally ill teenager through the
inon-profit Make a Film Foundation.[137][138][139] He also reprised his role
ias
iCaptain Jack Sparrow in the fifth installment of the Pirates series, Dead Men
iTell No Tales (2017). In the US, it did not perform as well as previous
iinstallments,[140] and Depp was nominated for two Golden Raspberry Awards for
iworst actor and for worst screen combo with "his worn-out drunk
iroutine".[141]
iHowever, the film had a good box office return internationally, especially in
iChina, Japan and Russia.[142] Depp's last film release in 2017 was the Agatha
iChristie adaptation Murder on the Orient Express, in which he was part of an
iensemble cast led by director-star Kenneth Branagh.
i
iIn 2018, Depp voiced the title character Sherlock Gnomes in the animated
imovie Gnomeo & Juliet: Sherlock Gnomes. Although moderately commercially
isuccessful, it was critically panned[143][144] and earned Depp two Golden
iRaspberry nominations, one for his acting and another for his "fast-fading
ifilm career".[145] Depp then starred in two independent films, both produced
iby him and his company, Infinitum Nihil. The first was City of Lies, in which
ihe starred as Russell Poole, an LAPD detective who attempts to solve the
imurders of rappers Tupac Shakur and The Notorious B.I.G. It was set for
irelease in September 2018, but was pulled from the release schedule after a
icrew member sued Depp for assault.[146] The second film was the comedy-drama
iRichard Says Goodbye, in which Depp played a professor with terminal cancer.
iIt premiered at the Zurich Film Festival in October 2018.[147] Depp's last
ifilm release of 2018 was Fantastic Beasts: The Crimes of Grindelwald, in
iwhich
ihe reprised his role as Grindelwald. Depp's casting received criticism from
ifans of the series due to the domestic violence allegations against
ihim.[148][149]
i
iDepp also experienced other career setbacks around this time, as Disney
iconfirmed that they would not be casting him in new Pirates installments[150]
iand he was reported to no longer be attached to Universal's Dark Universe
ifranchise.[151][152] Depp's next films were the independent dramas Waiting
ifor
ithe Barbarians (2019), based on a novel by J.M. Coetzee, and Minamata (2020),
iin which he portrayed photographer W. Eugene Smith and which premiered at the
i2020 Berlin International Film Festival.[153] In November 2020, Depp resigned
ifrom his role as Grindelwald in the Fantastic Beasts franchise at the request
iof its production company, Warner Bros., after he lost his UK libel case
iagainst The Sun, which had accused him of being a domestic
iabuser.[154][155][156] He was replaced by Mads Mikkelsen.[157] Soon after,
iThe
iHollywood Reporter called Depp "persona non-grata" in the film industry.[158]
i
iIn March 2021, City of Lies, which was originally scheduled for 2018, was
ireleased in theaters and streaming services.[159][160] The same month, an
ionline petition to bring Depp back to the Pirates franchise, begun four
imonths
iearlier, reached its goal of 500,000 signatures.[161] His Pirates co-star
iKevin McNally also expressed support for Depp returning to the role.[162] In
iJuly 2021, Andrew Levitas, the director of Minamata (2020), accused MGM of
itrying to bury the film due to Depp's involvement,[163][164][165] with Depp
iclaiming he is being boycotted by the Hollywood industry and calling his
ichanged reputation an "absurdity of media mathematics".[166] Minamata was
ireleased in the UK and Ireland in August 2021,[167] and in North America in
iDecember 2021.[168] The film received positive reviews,[169] with multiple
ipublications praising Depp's performance as his best in
iyears.[170][171][172][173][174] Depp also continues as the face of Dior's
imen's fragrance, Sauvage.[175][176]
i
iDepp received multiple honorary awards at numerous European film festivals,
iincluding at the Camerimage festival in Poland,[177] the Karlovy Vary
iInternational Film Festival in the Czech Republic,[178] and the San Sebastián
iInternational Film Festival in Spain,[179] where Depp was awarded the
iDonostia
iAward.[180] These awards were controversial, with various domestic violence
icharities criticizing the festivals.[181][182] The organisers of the
iceremonies released statements defending their decision to award
iDepp,[183][184][185] with the San Sebastian Film Festival stating that "he
ihas
inot been charged by any authority in any jurisdiction, nor convicted of any
iform of violence against women".[186]
i
iIn September 2021, Depp described himself as a victim of cancel culture.[187]
iThe same month, he launched IN.2, a London-based sister company to his
iproduction company, Infinitum Nihil, and announced that IN.2 and the Spanish
iproduction company A Contracorriente Films were starting a new development
ifund for TV and film projects.[188]
i
iOn February 15, 2022, Depp received the Serbian Gold Medal of Merit from
iPresident Aleksandar Vučić for "outstanding merits in public and cultural
iactivities, especially in the field of film art and the promotion of the
iRepublic of Serbia in the world".[189][190] Minamata and animated series
iPuffins were shot in the country.[191]
i
iIn 2022, Depp was cast as King Louis XV in French actor-director Maïwenn's
iperiod film Jeanne du Barry.[192] Jeanne du Barry tells the story of Madame
idu
iBarry, an impoverished seamstress who rises through the ranks of Louis XV's
icourt to become his official mistress. Netflix co-financed and will stream
ithe
iFrench period drama. This was the first film for Depp where he acts in
iFrench.[193] The film premiered at the 2023 Cannes Film Festival opening the
ifestival. Depp was praised for his performance with Deadline Hollywood
iwriting, "Maïwenn [the director] leans heavily into Depp’s chops as a visual
iactor. Depp’s deadpan face throughout is priceless."[194] Variety critic
ihowever gave a mixed response saying "For his part, Depp delivers his lines
iin
iwell-turned French, wearing fine powder and a stiff white wig, and yet he
iseems strangely uncomfortable in the role — adequate but not especially
iengaged."[195]
i
iIn August 2022, Depp is set to direct Modigliani, a film about Amedeo
iModigliani, which he will co-produce alongside Al Pacino and Barry
iNavidi.[196] The film is based on a play by Dennis McIntyre, which was
ipreviously adapted for the 2004 film of the same name, from a screenplay by
iJerzy and Mary Kromolowski.[196] Principal photography will commence in
i2023.[196] He made a surprise cameo appearance at the 2022 MTV Video Music
iAwards.[197]
i
i===== Other ventures =====
i
iIn 2004, Depp founded film production company Infinitum Nihil to develop
iprojects where he will serve as actor or producer.[81] He serves as its CEO,
iwhile his sister, Christi Dembrowski, serves as president.[81][198] The
icompany's first two film releases were The Rum Diary (2011) and Hugo
i(2011).[199]
i
iDepp co-owned the nightclub The Viper Room in Los Angeles from 1993 to
i2003,[200] and he was also part owner of the restaurant-bar Man Ray in Paris
ifor a short period of time.[201] Depp and Douglas Brinkley edited folk singer
iWoody Guthrie's novel House of Earth,[202] which was published in 2013.[203]
i
iPrior to his acting career, Depp was a guitarist, and has later featured on
isongs by Oasis, Shane MacGowan, Iggy Pop, Vanessa Paradis, Aerosmith, Marilyn
iManson, and The New Basement Tapes, among others. He also performed with
iManson at the Revolver Golden Gods Awards in 2012.[204] Depp played guitar on
ithe soundtrack of his films Chocolat and Once Upon a Time in Mexico, and has
iappeared in music videos for Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers, The Lemonheads,
iAvril Lavigne and Paul McCartney. In the 1990s, he was also a member of P, a
imusical group featuring Butthole Surfers singer Gibby Haynes, Red Hot Chili
iPeppers bassist Flea and Sex Pistols guitarist Steve Jones.
i
iIn 2015, Depp formed the supergroup Hollywood Vampires with Alice Cooper and
iJoe Perry; the band also includes Bruce Witkin, his friend from his 1980s
iband, The Kids. Hollywood Vampires released their self-titled debut studio
ialbum in September 2015. It featured eleven classic rock covers, as well as
ithree original songs (all co-written by Depp).[205] The band made their live
idebut at The Roxy in Los Angeles in September 2015,[206] and has since done
itwo world tours in 2016[207] and 2018.[208][209] Their second studio album,
iRise, was released in June 2019 and consists mostly of original material,
iincluding songs written by Depp. The album also features a cover version of
iDavid Bowie's "Heroes", sung by Depp.[210]
i
iIn 2020, Depp released a cover of John Lennon's "Isolation" with guitarist
iJeff Beck, and stated that they would be releasing more music together in the
ifuture.[211] Beginning in May 2022, Depp joined Beck onstage for a number of
iconcerts in the United Kingdom, where Beck announced they had recorded an
ialbum together.[212] Their joint record, titled 18, was released on July 15,
i2022. Depp also accompanied Beck on his European tour, which began in
iJune.[213] In May 2023, Depp performed at the Jeff Beck tribute concerts held
iat the Royal Albert Hall in London, sharing the stage with Eric Clapton, Rod
iStewart, Ronnie Wood and Kirk Hammett among others.[214][215]
i
iIn July 2022, artwork made by Depp sold out in less than a day since it
idebuted in the art retailer Castle Fine Art gallery in London's Covent
iGarden.
iThe art house hosted his "Friends & Heroes" collection, which was described
ias
ipaintings of people "who have inspired him as a person". Among the art
ipieces,
ithe names include actors Al Pacino and Elizabeth Taylor and musicians Bob
iDylan and Keith Richards. Depp made for nearly $4 million and sold 780 prints
ithrough the art house's 37 galleries. Ahead of the sale, Depp expressed his
idesire to display his art publicly and stated, "I've always used art to
iexpress my feelings and to reflect on those who matter most to me, like my
ifamily, friends and people I admire." He added, "My paintings surround my
ilife, but I kept them to myself and limited myself. No one should ever limit
ithemselves."[216] All 780 pieces sold within hours, with framed individual
iimages going for £3,950 and the complete portfolio of four images selling for
i£14,950. "This world-first release proved to be our fastest-selling
icollection
ito date, with all titles selling out in just hours," the gallery announced on
iInstagram. Speaking on behalf of fine art publishers, Washington Green Glyn
iWashington described Depp as a "true creative, with an extraordinary eye for
idetail and nuance".[217][218]
i
i===== Reception and public image =====
i
iIn the 1990s, Depp was seen as a new type of male film star that rejected the
inorms of that role.[219][220] After becoming a teen idol in 21 Jump
iStreet,[221] he publicly protested against the image, and with his subsequent
ifilm and public relations choices began to cultivate a new public
ipersona.[219][220] The Sydney Morning Herald characterized Depp in the 1990s
ias the "bad boy of Hollywood";[222] Depp's chain smoking,[222] recreational
idrug use and drinking habits were generally documented during this time.[223]
iAccording to The Guardian journalist Hadley Freeman in 2020:
i
i"Along with Phoenix and Keanu Reeves, he was part of a holy trinity of grunge
iheart-throbs. They were the opposite of the Beverly Hills, 90210 boys, or
iBrad
iPitt and DiCaprio, because they seemed embarrassed by their looks, even
iresentful of them. ...This uninterest in their own prettiness made them seem
iedgy, even while their prettiness softened that edge. They signified not just
ia different kind of celebrity, but a different kind of masculinity: desirable
ibut gentle, manly but girlish. Depp in particular was the cool pinup it was
isafe to like, and the safe pinup it was cool to like. We fans understood that
ithere was more to Depp, Phoenix and Reeves than handsomeness. They were
iartistic—they had bands!—and they thought really big thoughts, which they
iwould ramble on about confusingly in interviews. If we dated them, we
iunderstood that our role would be to understand their souls."[219]
i
iSimilarly, film scholar Anna Everett has described Depp's 1990s films and
ipublic persona as "anti-macho" and "gender-bending", going against the
iconventions of a Hollywood leading man.[220] After 21 Jump Street, Depp chose
ito work in independent films, often taking on quirky roles that sometimes
ieven
icompletely obscured his looks, such as Edward Scissorhands.[219][220] Critics
ioften described Depp's characters as "iconic loners"[42] or "gentle
ioutsiders".[220] According to Depp, his onetime agent, Tracey Jacobs of
iUnited
iTalent Agency (UTA), had to take "a lot of heat over the years" for his role
ichoices; Depp characterized higher-ups at UTA as thinking, "Jesus Christ!
iWhen
idoes he do a movie where he kisses the girl? When does he get to pull a gun
iout and shoot somebody? When does he get to be a [fucking] man for a change?
iWhen is he finally going to do a blockbuster?"[224] Depp also cultivated the
iimage of a bad boy. According to Everett, his "rule-breaking" roles matched
iwith the "much publicized rebelliousness, unconventionality, and volatility
iascribed to Depp's own personal life throughout the decade. From reports of
ihis repeated confrontations with the police, trashing of a hotel room, chain
ismoking, drinking, and drug use, to his multiple engagements to such
iglamorous
iwomen as supermodel Kate Moss and Hollywood starlet Winona Ryder and others,
iwe clearly see a perfect fit between his non-conformist star image and his
irepertoire of outsider characters".[220]
i
iAfter a decade of appearing mainly in independent films with varying
icommercial success, Depp became one of the biggest box-office draws in the
i2000s with his role as Captain Jack Sparrow in Walt Disney Studios' Pirates
iof
ithe Caribbean franchise.[225] The five films in the series have earned US$4.5
ibillion as of 2021. In addition to the Pirates franchise, Depp also made
ifurther four films with Tim Burton that were major successes, with one, Alice
iin Wonderland (2010), becoming the biggest commercial hit of Depp's career
iand
ione of the highest-grossing films in history (as of 2021).[226]
i
iAccording to film scholar Murray Pomerance, Depp's collaboration with Disney
i"can be seen to purport and herald a new era for Johnny Depp, one in which he
iis, finally, as though long-promised and long-expected, the proud proprietor
iof a much-accepted career; not only a star but a middle-class hero".[225] In
i2003, the same year as the first film in the Pirates series was released,
iDepp
iwas named "World's Sexiest Man" by People; he would receive the title again
iin
i2009.[225] During the decade and into the 2010s, Depp was one of the biggest
iand most popular film stars in the world[1][2] and was named by public vote
ias
i"Favorite Male Movie Star" at the People's Choice Awards every year for 2005
ithrough 2012. In 2012, Depp became the highest-paid actor in the American
ifilm
iindustry, earning as high as $75 million per film,[3] and as of 2020, is the
itenth highest-grossing actor worldwide, with his films having grossed over
iUS$3.7 billion at the United States box office and over US$10 billion
iworldwide.[227] Although a mainstream favorite with the audiences, critics'
iviews on Depp changed in the 2000s, becoming more negative as he was seen to
iconform more to the Hollywood ideal.[225] Regardless, Depp continued to
ieschew
imore traditional leading-man roles until towards the end of the 2000s, when
ihe
istarred as John Dillinger in Public Enemies (2009).[225]
i
iIn the 2010s, Depp's films were less successful, with many big-budget studio
ifilms such as Dark Shadows (2012), The Lone Ranger (2013), and Alice Through
ithe Looking Glass (2016) which underperformed at the box
ioffice.[112][110][115][116] Depp also received negative publicity due to
iallegations of domestic violence, substance abuse, poor on-set behavior and
ithe loss of his US$650 million fortune.[228][229][230][231][219] After losing
ia highly publicized libel trial against the publishers of The Sun, Depp was
iasked to resign from Warner Bros.' Fantastic Beasts franchise.[154] Many
ipublications alleged that Depp would struggle to find further work in major
istudio productions in the future.[158][219][232]
i
i===== Personal life =====
i
iDepp had initially bought a £13 million estate in Somerset in 2014,[233] and
icurrently lives in London.[234]
i
iDepp and makeup artist Lori Anne Allison were married from 1983 until
i1985.[235] In the late 1980s, he was engaged to actresses Jennifer Grey and
iSherilyn Fenn.[219] In 1990, he proposed to his Edward Scissorhands co-star
iWinona Ryder, whom he had begun dating the year prior when she was 17 and he
iwas 26.[236][237] They ended their relationship in 1993;[236] Depp later had
ithe "Winona Forever" tattoo on his right arm changed to "Wino Forever".[219]
iBetween 1994 and 1998, he was in a relationship with English model Kate
iMoss.[238] Following his breakup from Moss, Depp began a relationship with
iFrench actress and singer Vanessa Paradis, whom he met while filming The
iNinth
iGate in France in 1998. They have two children, daughter Lily-Rose Melody
iDepp
i(born 1999) and a son, Jack (born 2002).[239] Depp stated that having
ichildren
ihas given him a "real foundation, a real strong place to stand in life, in
iwork, in everything ...You cannot plan the kind of deep love that results in
ichildren. Fatherhood was not a conscious decision. It was part of the
iwonderful ride I was on. It was destiny. All the math finally worked".[72] In
iJune 2012, Depp and Paradis announced their separation.[240]
i
iFollowing the end of his relationship with Vanessa Paradis, Depp began dating
iactress Amber Heard, with whom he had co-starred in The Rum Diary
i(2011).[241]
iDepp and Heard were married in a civil ceremony on February 3,
i2015.[242][243][244] Heard filed for divorce on May 23, 2016, and obtained a
itemporary restraining order against Depp, alleging in her court declaration
ithat he had been verbally and physically abusive throughout their
irelationship, usually while under the influence of drugs or
ialcohol.[245][246][247][231] Depp denied these claims and alleged that she
iwas
i"attempting to secure a premature financial resolution".[248][245][249] A
isettlement was reached in August 2016,[250] and the divorce was finalized in
iJanuary 2017.[251] Heard dismissed the restraining order, and they issued a
ijoint statement saying that their "relationship was intensely passionate and
iat times volatile, but always bound by love. Neither party has made false
iaccusations for financial gain. There was never any intent of physical or
iemotional harm".[250] Depp paid Heard a divorce settlement of US$7 million,
iwhich she pledged to donate[252] to the ACLU[253] and the Children's Hospital
iLos Angeles (CHLA).[254][255]
i
iIn 2018,[256] Depp brought a libel lawsuit in the UK against News Group
iNewspapers (NGN), publishers of The Sun, over an April 2018 article titled
i"GONE POTTY How Can J K Rowling be "genuinely happy" casting wife beater
iJohnny Depp in the new Fantastic Beasts film?".[257][258][259] The case had a
ihighly publicized trial in July 2020, with both Depp and Heard testifying for
iseveral days.[260] In November 2020, the High Court of Justice ruled that 12
iof the 14 incidents of violence claimed by Heard were "substantially
itrue".[258][259] The court rejected Depp's claim of a hoax[261] and accepted
ithat the allegations Heard had made against Depp had damaged her career and
iactivism.[258][259] Following the verdict, Depp resigned from the Fantastic
iBeasts franchise, after being asked to do so by its production company,
iWarner
iBros.[156]
i
iDepp appealed the verdict, with his lawyers accusing Heard of not following
ithrough on a promise to donate her divorce settlement to charity contrary to
iher testimony. Depp's lawyers also asserted that Heard's donation testimony
ihad significantly influenced the judge's view of Heard.[262] In response,
iHeard's legal team stated that she had not yet donated the full amount due to
ithe financial burden of the lawsuits against her by Depp.[263] Depp's appeal
ito overturn the verdict was rejected by the England and Wales Court of Appeal
iin March 2021,[264] with the Court of Appeal stating: "We do not accept that
ithere is any ground for believing that the judge may have been influenced by
iany such general perception...In the first place, he does not refer to her
icharitable donation at all in the context of his central findings...On the
icontrary, he only mentions it in a very particular context...and after he had
ialready reached his conclusions in relation to the 14 incidents.".[265]
i
iIn February 2019, Depp sued Heard for defamation over a December 2018 op-ed
ifor The Washington Post.[266][267][268] The lawsuit ultimately resulting in
iDepp alleging that the op-ed contained three defamatory statements: first,
iits
iheadline, "Amber Heard: I spoke up against sexual violence — and faced our
iculture's wrath. That has to change"; second, Heard's writing: "Then two
iyears
iago, I became a public figure representing domestic abuse, and I felt the
ifull
iforce of our culture's wrath for women who speak out"; and third, Heard's
iwriting: "I had the rare vantage point of seeing, in real time, how
iinstitutions protect men accused of abuse."[269][270] Depp alleged that he
ihad
ibeen the one who was abused by Heard, that her allegations constituted a hoax
iagainst him, and that as a consequence, Disney had declined to cast him in
ifuture projects.[266][268]
i
iHeard countersued Depp in August 2020, alleging that he had coordinated "a
iharassment campaign via Twitter and [by] orchestrating online petitions in an
ieffort to get her fired from Aquaman and L'Oreal".[271][272] Ultimately,
iHeard's counter-suit went to trial over three allegations that Depp had
idefamed her through statements made by his then-lawyer, Adam Waldman,
ipublished in the Daily Mail in April 2020: first, Waldman stated that "Heard
iand her friends in the media used fake sexual violence allegations as both
isword and shield", publicizing a "sexual violence hoax" against Depp; second,
iWaldman stated that in one incident at a penthouse, "Amber and her friends
ispilled a little wine and roughed the place up, got their stories straight
iunder the direction of a lawyer and publicist, and then placed a second call
ito 911" as a "hoax" against Depp; third, Waldman stated that there had been
ian
i"abuse hoax" by Heard against Depp.[269][273]
i
iIn October 2020, the judge in the case dismissed Depp's lawyer Adam Waldman
iafter he leaked confidential information covered by a protective order to the
imedia.[158][274] Following the verdict in Depp's lawsuit against The Sun the
inext month, Heard's lawyers filed to have the defamation suit dismissed, but
ijudge Penny Azcarate ruled against it because Heard had not been a party in
ithe UK case.[275] In August 2021, a New York judge ruled that the ACLU must
idisclose documents related to Heard's charity pledge to the
iorganization.[276][277]
i
iThe Depp-Heard trial took place in Fairfax County, Virginia on April 11,
i2022. On the day of the trial, he confided in writer and journalist Jessica
iReed Kraus about his dissatisfaction with the way the traditional media has
ipainted him.[278] During the trial, Heard accused Depp of domestic abuse,
istating that Depp "plunged into the depths of paranoia and violence after
ibinging on drugs and alcohol" during their relationship. While Depp accused
iHeard of several instances of physical and verbal abuse during their
irelationship.[231][279][250][280]
i
iOn June 1, 2022, the jury returned a verdict after 13 hours of deliberation.
iIn their verdict, the jury found that all three statements from Heard's op-ed
iwere false, defamed Depp, and were made with actual malice. The jury awarded
iDepp $10 million in compensatory damages and $5 million in punitive
idamages,[269][273] though the punitive damages were reduced to $350,000 due
ito
ia limit imposed by an existing Virginia state law.[281] For Heard's
icounter-suit, the jury found that Waldman's first and third statements to the
iDaily Mail were not defamatory, while finding that Waldman's second statement
ito the Daily Mail was false, defamatory and made with actual malice.[273] As
ia
iresult, Heard was awarded $2 million in compensatory damages and zero in
ipunitive damages from Depp.[269]
i
iDepp reacted to the result of the trial by declaring that the "jury gave me
imy life back. I am truly humbled."[282] Depp also stated that he was
i"overwhelmed by the outpouring of love and the colossal support and kindness
ifrom around the world." He continued: "I hope that my quest to have the truth
ibe told will have helped others, men or women, who have found themselves in
imy
isituation, and that those supporting them never give up."[283] Depp also
ihighlighted "the noble work of the Judge, the jurors, the court staff and the
iSheriffs who have sacrificed their own time to get to this point", and
ipraised
ihis "diligent and unwavering legal team" for "an extraordinary job".[284]
i
iAfter they filed to appeal the verdict, Heard and Depp settled the case in
iDecember 2022, with Heard maintaining that the settlement was "not an act of
iconcession"; meanwhile Depp's lawyers stated that the "jury's unanimous
idecision and the resulting judgement in Mr. Depp's favor against Ms. Heard
iremain fully in place", and that the settlement would result in $1 million
ibeing paid to Depp, which "Depp is pledging and will donate to
icharities".[285][286]
i
iDepp was arrested in Vancouver in 1989 for assaulting a security guard after
ithe police were called to end a loud party at his hotel room.[287] He was
ialso
iarrested in New York City in 1994 after causing significant damage to his
iroom
iat The Mark Hotel, where he was staying with Kate Moss, his girlfriend. The
icharges were dropped against him after he agreed to pay US$9,767 in
idamages.[288]
i
iDepp was arrested again in 1999 for brawling with paparazi, when the
iphotographers tried to take his picture. He allegedly threatened them with a
iwooden plank when they approached him outside Mirabelle restaurant in central
iLondon early on Sunday morning.[289]
i
iIn 2012, UC Irvine medical professor Robin Eckert sued Depp and three
isecurity firms, Premier Group International, Damian Executive Production Inc.
iand Staff Pro Inc.,[290] claiming to have been roughed up by his bodyguards
iat
ia concert in Los Angeles in 2011. During the incident, she was allegedly
ihand-cuffed and dragged 40 feet across the floor, resulting in injuries
iincluding a dislocated elbow. Depp's attorneys contended that Eckert provoked
ithe alleged assault and therefore "consented to any assault and
ibattery".[291]
iEkert's court papers stated that Depp, despite being his security guards'
idirect manager, did nothing to stop the attack.[292] Before the case went to
itrial, Depp settled with Eckert for an undisclosed sum, according to
iTMZ.[293]
i
iIn April 2015, Depp's then-wife Amber Heard breached Australia's biosecurity
ilaws when she failed to declare their two dogs to the customs when they flew
ito Queensland, where he was working on a film.[294][295] Heard pleaded guilty
ito falsifying quarantine documents, stating that she had made a mistake due
ito
isleep deprivation.[296] She was placed on a $1,000 one-month good behavior
ibond for producing a false document;[297] Heard and Depp also released a
ivideo
iin which they apologized for their behavior and urged people to adhere to the
ibiosecurity laws.[297] The Guardian called the case the "highest profile
icriminal quarantine case" in Australian history.[297]
i
iIn March 2016, Depp cut ties with his management company, The Management
iGroup (TMG), and sued them in January 2017 for alleged embezzlement and for
iallegedly improperly managing his money and leaving him over $40 million in
idebt.[298][299] TMG stated that Depp was responsible for his own fiscal
imismanagement and countersued him for unpaid fees.[298][300] In a related
isuit, Depp also sued his lawyers, Bloom Hergott, in January 2017.[301] Both
ilawsuits were settled, the former in 2018 and the latter in
i2019.[301][302][298]
i
iIn 2018, two of Depp's former bodyguards sued him for unpaid fees and unsafe
iworking conditions.[303] The suit was settled in 2019.[304]
i
iAlso in 2018, Depp was sued for allegedly hitting and verbally insulting a
icrew member while under the influence of alcohol on the set of City of
iLies.[305] A lawyer for Depp told the media that "Depp never touched the
i[crew
imember], as over a dozen witnesses present will attest"; meanwhile Depp's
ilegal team entered a court filing that did not admit that Depp hit the crew
imember, but stated that the crew member "provoked" the incident with
i"unlawful
iand wrongful conduct", causing Depp and film director Brad Furman to fear for
itheir safety.[306] A film script supervisor submitted a court declaration
ithat
iDepp did not hit the crew member, and only scolded him.[307] Before the
ilawsuit went to trial, a tentative settlement regarding the dismissal of the
ilawsuit was reached between Depp and the crew member in July 2022.[307]
i
iDepp has struggled with substance abuse for much of his life. He has stated
ithat he began using drugs by taking his mother's "nerve pills" at the age of
i11, was smoking at age 12 and by the age of 14 had used "every kind of drugs
ithere were".[308][309] In a 1997 interview, Depp acknowledged past abuse of
ialcohol during the filming of What's Eating Gilbert Grape? (1993).[308] In a
i2008 interview, Depp stated that he had "poisoned" himself with alcohol "for
iyears".[308] In 2013, Depp declared that he had stopped drinking alcohol,
iadding that he "pretty much got everything [he] could get out of it"; Depp
ialso said, "I investigated wine and spirits thoroughly, and they certainly
iinvestigated me as well, and we found out that we got along beautifully, but
imaybe too well".[310] Regarding his breakup with longtime partner Vanessa
iParadis, Depp said that he "definitely wasn't going to rely on the drink to
iease things or cushion the blow or cushion the situation ...[because] that
icould have been fatal".[310] In a 2018 Rolling Stone profile of Depp,
ireporter
iStephen Rodrick wrote that he had used hashish in his presence and described
ihim as "alternately hilarious, sly and incoherent"; Depp also said that the
iallegation made by his former business managers that he had spent US$30,000
iper month on wine was "insulting" because he had spent "far more" than that
iamount.[228] During his 2020 libel trial, Depp admitted to having been
iaddicted to Roxicodone and to having misused alcohol. He also admitted to
iusing other substances such as marijuana, MDMA and
icocaine.[311][312][313][314]
i
iIn November 2016, Depp joined the campaign Imprisoned for Art to call for the
irelease of Ukrainian filmmaker Oleg Sentsov, who was being held in custody in
iRussia.[315]
i
iAt the Glastonbury Festival 2017, Depp, criticizing President Donald Trump,
iasked: "When was the last time an actor assassinated a president? I want to
iclarify: I'm not an actor. I lie for a living. However, it's been a while and
imaybe it's time. I'm not insinuating anything." The comment was interpreted
ias
ia reference to John Wilkes Booth, the actor who assassinated Abraham Lincoln.
iShawn Holtzclaw of the Secret Service told CNN they were aware of Depp's
icomment, but that "for security reasons, we cannot discuss specifically nor
iin
igeneral terms the means and methods of how we perform our protective
iresponsibilities".[316][317] Depp apologized shortly afterward, saying the
iremark "did not come out as intended, and I intended no malice".[318]
i
i===== Filmography and accolades =====
i
i===== Discography =====
i
i===== See also =====
i
i===== Notes =====
i
i===== References =====
i
i===== External links =====
i
i
i
i  ------------- SOURCE ----------------
i
iURL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Johnny_Depp
i
iLICENSE: Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike
i
i=========================================
i
i
i$
Bt:Johnny Depp - Wikipedia	/x/w/g/https_58__47__47_en_46_wikipedia_46_org_47_wiki_47_Johnny_95_Depp	texopher.com	70
